Older adults and people who have severe underlying medical conditions like heart or lung disease or diabetes seem to be at higher risk for developing more serious complications from COVID-19 illness.
A guide to help you make decisions and seek appropriate medical care.
People with COVID-19 have had a wide range of symptoms reported – ranging from mild symptoms to severe illness.
These symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
A guide to help you make decisions and seek appropriate medical care
There are laboratory tests that can identify the virus that causes COVID-19 in respiratory specimens.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC, whereas medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
Here is some information that might help you make decisions about seeking medical care or testing.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are at the discretion of state and local health departments and/or individual clinicians.
COVID-19 testing differs by location.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your medical provider first.
You can also visit your state or localexternal icon health departments website to look for the latest local information on testing.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find a place to get tested.
Community transmission of COVID-19 is occurring in parts of the United States.
In the coming months, most of the U.S. population will be exposed to this virus.
You should continue to practice all the protective measures recommended to keep yourself and others from getting infected.
See How to Protect Yourself.S.
Food and Drug Adminstration FAQs on Diagnostic Testing for SARS-CoV-2external icon.
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
For information on testing for healthcare professionals, see recommendations for reporting, testing, and specimen collection at Interim Guidance for Healthcare Professionals.
Protect Yourself and Others
You can take steps to slow the spread of COVID-19.
Learn more
How to Protect Yourself
Cleaning and Disinfecting Your Home
COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly through close contact from person-to-person in respiratory droplets from someone who is infected.
People who are infected often have symptoms of illness.
Some people without symptoms may be able to spread virus.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning about how it spreads and the severity of illness it causes.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person.
Maintaining good social distance (about 6 feet) is very important in preventing the spread of COVID-19.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads, but we are still learning more about this virus.
Wash your hands often with soap and water.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand rub.
Also, routinely clean frequently touched surfaces.
How easily a virus spreads from person-to-person can vary.
Some viruses are highly contagious, like measles, while other viruses do not spread as easily.
Another factor is whether the spread is sustained, which means it goes from person-to-person without stopping.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading very easily and sustainably between people.
Information from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic suggest that this virus is spreading more efficiently than influenza, but not as efficiently as measles, which is highly contagious.
Older adults and people who have severe underlying medical conditions like heart or lung disease or diabetes seem to be at higher risk for developing serious complications from COVID-19 illness.
More information on Are you at higher risk for serious illness?
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain (e.g grocery stores and pharmacies), especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
CDC also advises the use of simple cloth face coverings to slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
Cloth face coverings fashioned from household items or made at home from common materials at low cost can be used as an additional, voluntary public health measure.
Cloth face coverings should not be placed on young children under age 2, anyone who has trouble breathing, or is unconscious, incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
The cloth face coverings recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Yes.
They should be routinely washed depending on the frequency of use.
A washing machine should suffice in properly washing a face covering.
Individuals should be careful not to touch their eyes, nose, and mouth when removing their face covering and wash hands immediately after removing.
1.
Cut out two 10-by-6-inch rectangles of cotton fabric.
Use tightly woven cotton, such as quilting fabric or cotton sheets.
T-shirt fabric will work in a pinch.
Stack the two rectangles; you will sew the mask as if it was a single piece of fabric.
2.
Fold over the long sides ¼ inch and hem.
Then fold the double layer of fabric over ½ inch along the short sides and stitch down.
3.
Run a 6-inch length of 1/8-inch wide elastic through the wider hem on each side of the mask.
These will be the ear loops.
Use a large needle or a bobby pin to thread it through.
Tie the ends tight.
Dont have elastic?
Use hair ties or elastic head bands.
If you only have string, you can make the ties longer and tie the mask behind your head.
4.
Gently pull on the elastic so that the knots are tucked inside the hem.
Gather the sides of the mask on the elastic and adjust so the mask fits your face.
Then securely stitch the elastic in place to keep it from slipping.
Use of Cloth Face Coverings to Help Slow the Spread of COVID-19
CDC continues to study the spread and effects of the novel coronavirus across the United States.
We now know from recent studies that a significant portion of individuals with coronavirus lack symptoms (asymptomatic) and that even those who eventually develop symptoms (pre-symptomatic) can transmit the virus to others before showing symptoms.
This means that the virus can spread between people interacting in close proximity—for example, speaking, coughing, or sneezing—even if those people are not exhibiting symptoms.
In light of this new evidence, CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain (e.g grocery stores and pharmacies) especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
It is critical to emphasize that maintaining 6-feet social distancing remains important to slowing the spread of the virus.
CDC is additionally advising the use of simple cloth face coverings to slow the spread of the virus and help people who may have the virus and do not know it from transmitting it to others.
Cloth face coverings fashioned from household items or made at home from common materials at low cost can be used as an additional, voluntary public health measure.
The cloth face coverings recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators.
Those are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for healthcare workers and other medical first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
This recommendation complements and does not replace the Presidents Coronavirus Guidelines for America, 30 Days to Slow the Spreadexternal icon, which remains the cornerstone of our national effort to slow the spread of the coronavirus.
CDC will make additional recommendations as the evidence regarding appropriate public health measures continues to develop.
This document is intended to address frequently asked questions about cloth face coverings.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is to protect people around you if you are infected but do not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people are in a community setting, especially in situations where you may be near people.
These settings include grocery stores and pharmacies.
These face coverings are not a substitute for social distancing.
Cloth face coverings are especially important to wear in public in areas of widespread COVID-19 illness.
Yes.
Wearing cloth face coverings is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19.
CDC still recommends that you stay at least 6 feet away from other people (social distancing), frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but it may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
View CDCs guidance on how to protect yourself.
Cloth face coverings can be made from household items or made at home from common materials at low cost.
Cloth face coverings should not be placed on young children younger than 2 years of age, anyone who has trouble breathing, or is unconscious, incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the cover without assistance.
Surgical masks and N95 respirators are in short supply and should be reserved for healthcare workers or other medical first responders, as recommended by CDC guidance.
Everyday Steps and Extra Steps When Someone Is Sick
For soft surfaces such as carpeted floor, rugs, and drapes
Launder items (if possible) according to the manufacturers instructions.Use the warmest appropriate water setting and dry items completely.
For electronics, such as tablets, touch screens, keyboards, and remote controls.
For clothing, towels, linens and other items
Keep separate bedroom and bathroom for a person who is sick (if possible)
More details: Complete Disinfection Guidance
Interim Recommendations for U.S.
Households with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Revisions were made on 3/26/2020 to reflect the following:
There is much to learn about the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Based on what is currently known about COVID-19, spread from person-to-person of this virus happens most frequently among close contacts (within about 6 feet).
This type of transmission occurs via respiratory droplets.
On the other hand, transmission of novel coronavirus to persons from surfaces contaminated with the virus has not been documented.
Recent studies indicate that people who are infected but do not have symptoms likely also play a role in the spread of COVID-19.
Transmission of coronavirus occurs much more commonly through respiratory droplets than through fomites.
Current evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2 may remain viable for hours to days on surfaces made from a variety of materials.
Cleaning of visibly dirty surfaces followed by disinfection is a best practice measure for prevention of COVID-19 and other viral respiratory illnesses in households and community settings.
It is unknown how long the air inside a room occupied by someone with confirmed COVID-19 remains potentially infectious.
Facilities will need to consider factors such as the size of the room and the ventilation system design (including flowrate air changes per hour and location of supply and exhaust vents) when deciding how long to close off rooms or areas used by ill persons before beginning disinfection.
Taking measures to improve ventilation in an area or room where someone was ill or suspected to be ill with COVID-19 will help shorten the time it takes respiratory droplets to be removed from the air.
This guidance provides recommendations on the cleaning and disinfection of households where persons under investigation (PUI) or those with confirmed COVID-19 reside or may be in self- isolation.
It is aimed at limiting the survival of the virus in the environments.
These recommendations will be updated if additional information becomes available.
These guidelines are focused on household settings and are meant for the general public.
Keep Your Distance to Slow the Spread
Limiting face-to-face contact with others is the best way to reduce the spread of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Social distancing, also called physical distancing, means keeping space between yourself and other people outside of your home.
To practice social or physical distancing:
In addition to everyday steps to prevent COVID-19, keeping space between you and others is one of the best tools we have to avoid being exposed to this virus and slowing its spread locally and across the country and world.
When COVID-19 is spreading in your area, everyone should limit close contact with individuals outside your household in indoor and outdoor spaces.
Since people can spread the virus before they know they are sick, it is important to stay away from others when possible, even if you have no symptoms.
Social distancing is especially important for people who are at higher risk of getting very sick.
COVID-19 spreads mainly among people who are in close contact (within about 6 feet) for a prolonged period.
Spread happens when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks, and droplets from their mouth or nose are launched into the air and land in the mouths or noses of people nearby.
The droplets can also be inhaled into the lungs.
Recent studies indicate that people who are infected but do not have symptoms likely also play a role in the spread of COVID-19.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
COVID-19 can live for hours or days on a surface, depending on factors such as sun light and humidity.
Social distancing helps limit contact with infected people and contaminated surfaces.
Although the risk of severe illness may be different for everyone, anyone can get and spread COVID-19.
Everyone has a role to play in slowing the spread and protecting themselves, their family, and their community.
Stay connected while staying away.
It is very important to stay in touch with friends and family that dont live in your home.
Call, video chat, or stay connected using social media.
Everyone reacts differently to stressful situations and having to socially distance yourself from someone you love can be difficult.
Read tips for stress and coping.
Quarantine is used to keep someone who might have been exposed to COVID-19 away from others.
Someone in self-quarantine stays separated from others, and they limit movement outside of their home or current place.
A person may have been exposed to the virus without knowing it (for example, when traveling or out in the community), or they could have the virus without feeling symptoms.
Quarantine helps limit further spread of COVID-19.
Isolation is used to separate sick people from healthy people.
People who are in isolation should stay home.
In the home, anyone sick should separate themselves from others by staying in a specific sick bedroom or space and using a different bathroom (if possible).
If you think you have been exposed to COVID-19, read about symptoms.
If you or someone in your home might have been exposed
Be alert for symptoms.
Watch for fever,* cough, or shortness of breath.
As a family, you can plan and make decisions now that will protect you and your family during a COVID-19 outbreak.
Related: How to Protect Yourself
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning.
Take additional precautions for those at higher risk, particularly older adults and those who have severe underlying health conditions.
More details: Detailed Planning Guidance
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this interim guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
Printer-friendly version:  pdf icon125 KB, 5 pages
This interim guidance is to help household members plan for community transmission of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in the United States.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) encourages household members to prepare for the possibility of a COVID-19 outbreak in their community.
COVID-19 is caused by a new virus.
There is much to learn about its transmissibility, severity, and other features of the disease.
We want to help everyone prepare to respond to this public health threat.
A COVID-19 outbreak could last for a long time in your community.
Depending on the severity of the outbreak, public health officials may recommend community actions designed to help keep people healthy, reduce exposures to COVID-19, and slow the spread of the disease.
Local public health officials may make recommendations appropriate to your local situation.
Creating a household plan can help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community.
You should base the details of your household plan on the needs and daily routine of your household members.
Talk with the people who need to be included in your plan.
Meet with household members, other relatives, and friends to discuss what to do if a COVID-19 outbreak occurs in your community and what the needs of each person will be.
Plan ways to care for those who might be at greater risk for serious complications.
There is limited information about who may be at risk for severe complications from COVID-19 illness.
From the data that are available for COVID-19 patients, and from data for related coronaviruses such as SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, it is possible that older adults and persons who have underlying chronic medical conditions may be at risk for more serious complications.
Early data suggest older people are more likely to have serious COVID-19 illness.
If you or your household members are at increased risk for COVID-19 complications, please consult with your health care provider for more information about monitoring your health for symptoms suggestive of COVID-19.
CDC will recommend actions to help keep people at high risk for complications healthy if a COVID-19 outbreak occurs in your community.
Get to know your neighbors.
Talk with your neighbors about emergency planning.
If your neighborhood has a website or social media page, consider joining it to maintain access to neighbors, information, and resources.
Identify aid organizations in your community.
Create a list of local organizations that you and your household can contact in the event you need access to information, health care services, support, and resources.
Consider including organizations that provide mental health or counseling services, food, and other supplies.
Create an emergency contact list.
Ensure your household has a current list of emergency contacts for family, friends, neighbors, carpool drivers, health care providers, teachers, employers, the local public health department, and other community resources.
Practice everyday preventive actions now.
Remind everyone in your household of the importance of practicing everyday preventive actions that can help prevent the spread of respiratory illnesses:
Choose a room in your home that can be used to separate sick household members from those who are healthy.
Identify a separate bathroom for the sick person to use, if possible.
Plan to clean these rooms, as needed, when someone is sick.
Learn how to care for someone with COVID-19 at home.
Learn about the emergency operations plan at your childs school or childcare facility.
During a COVID-19 outbreak in your community, local public health officials may recommend temporary school dismissals to help slow the spread of illness.
School authorities also may decide to dismiss a school if too many students or staff are absent.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Learn about your employers emergency operations plan.
Discuss sick-leave policies and telework options for workers who are sick or who need to stay home to care for sick household members.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Stay informed about the local COVID-19 situation.
Get up-to-date information about local COVID-19 activity from public health officialsexternal icon.
Be aware of temporary school dismissals in your area, as this may affect your households daily routine.
Stay home if you are sick.
Stay home if you have COVID-19 symptoms.
If a member of your household is sick, stay home from school and work to avoid spreading COVID-19 to others.
Continue practicing everyday preventive actions.
Cover coughs and sneezes with a tissue and wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer that contains 60% alcohol.
Clean frequently touched surfaces and objects daily using a regular household detergent and water.
Use the separate room and bathroom you prepared for sick household members (if possible).
Learn how to care for someone with COVID-19 at home.
Avoid sharing personal items like food and drinks.
Provide your sick household member with clean disposable facemasks to wear at home, if available, to help prevent spreading COVID-19 to others.
Clean the sick room and bathroom, as needed, to avoid unnecessary contact with the sick person.
Stay in touch with others by phone or email.
If you live alone and become sick during a COVID-19 outbreak, you may need help.
If you have a chronic medical condition and live alone, ask family, friends, and health care providers to check on you during an outbreak.
Stay in touch with family and friends with chronic medical conditions.
Take care of the emotional health of your household members.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
Notify your workplace as soon as possible if your schedule changes.
Ask to work from home or take leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Remember, a COVID-19 outbreak could last a long time.
The impact on individuals, households, and communities might be great.
When public health officials determine the outbreak has ended in your community, take time to improve your households plan.
As public health officials continue to plan for COVID-19 and other disease outbreaks, you and your household also have an important role to play in ongoing planning efforts.
Discuss and note lessons learned.
Were your COVID-19 preparedness actions effective at home, school, and work?
Talk about problems found in your plan and effective solutions.
Identify additional resources needed for you and your household.
Participate in community discussions about emergency planning.
Let others know about what readiness actions worked for you and your household.
Maintain communication lines with your community (e.g social media and email lists).
Promote the importance of practicing good personal health habits.
Continue to practice everyday preventive actions.
Stay home when you are sick; cover your coughs and sneezes with a tissue; wash your hands often with soap and water; and clean frequently touched surfaces and objects daily.
Take care of the emotional health of your household members.
Make time to unwind and remind yourself that strong feelings will fade.
Take breaks from watching, reading, or listening to news stories about COVID-19.
Connect with family and friends.
Share your concerns and how you are feeling with others.
Help your child/children cope after the outbreak.
Provide children with opportunities to talk about what they went through or what they think about it.
Encourage them to share concerns and ask questions.
Because parents, teachers, and other adults see children in different situations, it is important for them to work together to share information about how each child is coping after the outbreak.
CDC Interim Guidance for Specific Audiences
How to Protect Those That Are Most Vulnerable
This guidance is intended for people living together in close quarters, such as people who share a small apartment, or for people who live in the same household with large or extended families.
Older adults (65 and older) and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The following information is aimed to help you protect those who are most vulnerable in your household.
If your household includes one or more vulnerable individuals then all family members should act as if they, themselves, are at higher risk.
More information on steps and actions to take if at higher risk.
Family members should leave only when absolutely necessary.
Essential errands include going to the grocery store, pharmacy, or medical appointments that cannot be delayed (e.g infants or individuals with serious health conditions in need of aid).
If you must leave the house, please do the following:
Adults 65 years and older and people who have serious medical conditions should avoid caring for the children in their household, if possible.
If people at higher risk must care for the children in their household, the children in their care should not have contact with individuals outside the household.
Provide a separate bedroom and bathroom for the person who is sick, if possible.
If you cannot provide a separate room and bathroom, try to separate them from other household members as much as possible.
Keep people at higher risk separated from anyone who is sick.
Grocery Shopping, Take-Out, Banking, Getting Gas, and Doctor Visits.
As communities across the United States take steps to slow the spread of COVID-19 by limiting close contact, people are facing new challenges and questions about how to meet basic household needs, such as buying groceries and medicine, and completing banking activities.
The following information provides advice about how to meet these household needs in a safe and healthy manner.
Find additional information for people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
If you or a member of your household has signs of COVID-19, call your doctor first, instead of going to the office or the emergency department.
Call 911 if you believe it is an emergency.
The outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) may be stressful for people.
Fear and anxiety about a disease can be overwhelming and cause strong emotions in adults and children.
Coping with stress will make you, the people you care about, and your community stronger.
Stress during an infectious disease outbreak can include
How you respond to the outbreak can depend on your background, the things that make you different from other people, and the community you live in.
People who may respond more strongly to the stress of a crisis include
Taking care of yourself, your friends, and your family can help you cope with stress.
Helping others cope with their stress can also make your community stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others
Sharing the facts about COVID-19.
Understanding the risk to yourself and people you care about can make an outbreak less stressful.
When you share accurate information about COVID-19, you can help make people feel less stressed and make a connection with them.
Related: Reducing Stigma and Stop the Spread of Rumors
Call your healthcare provider if stress gets in the way of your daily activities for several days in a row.
People with preexisting mental health conditions should continue with their treatment and be aware of new or worsening symptoms.
Related: Taking Care of Your Emotional Health
Children and teens react, in part, on what they see from the adults around them.
When parents and caregivers deal with the COVID-19 calmly and confidently, they can provide the best support for their children.
Parents can be more reassuring to others around them, especially children, if they are better prepared.
Not all children and teens respond to stress in the same way.
Some common changes to watch for include
Related: Caring for Children and Helping Children Cope
People at higher risk for severe illness, such as older adults, and people with underlying health conditions are also at increased risk of stress due to COVID-19.
Special considerations include:
Check in with your loved ones often.
Virtual communication can help you and your loved ones feel less lonely and isolated.
Consider connecting with loved ones by:
Help keep your loved ones safe.
Take care of your own emotional health.
Caring for a loved one can take an emotional toll, especially during an outbreak like COVID-19.
There are ways to support yourself.
Stay home if you are sick.
Do not visit family or friends who are at greater risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Use virtual communication to keep in touch to support your loved one and keep them safe.
Community preparedness planning for COVID-19 should include older adults and people with disabilities, and the organizations that support them in their communities, to ensure their needs are taken into consideration.
It can be stressful to be separated from others if a healthcare provider thinks you may have been exposed to COVID-19, even if you do not get sick.
Everyone feels differently after coming out of quarantine.
Emotional reactions to coming out of quarantine may include
Children may also feel upset or have other strong emotions if they, or someone they know, has been released from quarantine.
Responding to COVID-19 can take an emotional toll on you, and you may experience secondary traumatic stress.
Secondary traumatic stress is stress reactions and symptoms resulting from exposure to another individuals traumatic experiences, rather than from exposure directly to a traumatic event.
There are things you can do to reduce secondary traumatic stress reactions:
Learn more tips for taking care of yourself during emergency response.
Get more information about stress management for first responders from the Disaster Technical Assistance Centerexternal icon (SAMHSA).
It is important to remember that people – including those of Asian descent – who do not live in or have not recently been in an area of ongoing spread of the virus that causes COVID-19, or have not been in contact with a person who is a confirmed or suspected case of COVID-19 are not at greater risk of spreading COVID-19 than other Americans.
Public health emergencies, such as the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), are stressful times for people and communities.
Fear and anxiety about a disease can lead to social stigma(1) toward people, places, or things.
For example, stigma and discrimination can occur when people associate a disease, such as COVID-19, with a population or nationality, even though not everyone in that population or from that region is specifically at risk for the disease.
Stigma can also occur after a person has been released from COVID-19 quarantine even though they are not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others.
Some groups of people who may be experiencing stigma because of COVID-19 include:
Stigma hurts everyone by creating fear or anger towards other people.
Stigmatized groups may be subjected to:
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health(2) of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient(3).
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
Related: Resources on Mental Health and Coping During COVID-19.
Printer friendly version pdf icon1 page
For up-to-date information, visit CDCs coronavirus disease 2019 situation summary page.
Fear and anxiety about COVID-19 can cause people to avoid or reject others even though they are not at risk for spreading the virus.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
For up-to-date information, visit CDCs coronavirus disease situation summary page.
People who have been in close contact with a person known to have COVID-19 or people who live in or have recently been in an area with ongoing spread are at an increased risk of exposure.
Help stop the spread of COVID-19 by doing the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
Teach your children to do the same.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at How to Protect Yourself and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
Related: Talking to Children About COVID-19
The key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to limit contact as much as possible.
While school is out, children should not have in-person playdates with children from other households.
If children are playing outside their own homes, it is essential that they remain 6 feet from anyone who is not in their own household.
To help children maintain social connections while social distancing, help your children have supervised phone calls or video chats with their friends.
Make sure children practice everyday preventive behaviors, such as washing their hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
This is especially important if you have been in a public place.
Revise spring break and travel plans if they included non-essential travel.
If children meet in groups, it can put everyone at risk.
Children with COVID-19 may only have mild symptoms, but they can still pass this virus onto others who may be at higher risk, including older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
Children 2 years and older should wear a cloth face covering their nose and mouth when in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally shown mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is more to learn about how the disease impacts children.
You can learn more about who is most at risk for health problems if they have COVID-19 infection on Are You at Higher Risk for Severe Illness.
Messages for parents, school staff, and others working with children
As public conversations around coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) increase, children may worry about themselves, their family, and friends getting ill with COVID-19.
Parents, family members, school staff, and other trusted adults can play an important role in helping children make sense of what they hear in a way that is honest, accurate, and minimizes anxiety or fear.
CDC has created guidance to help adults have conversations with children about COVID-19 and ways they can avoid getting and spreading the disease.
Make yourself available to listen and to talk.
Avoid language that might blame others and lead to stigma.
Pay attention to what children see or hear on television, radio, or online.
Provide information that is honest and accurate.
Teach children everyday actions to reduce the spread of germs.
Try to keep information simple and remind them that health and school officials are working hard to keep everyone safe and healthy.
What can I do so that I dont get COVID-19?
What happens if you get sick with COVID-19?
Protect Yourself and Others from COVID-19
Staying physically active is one of the best ways to keep your mind and body healthy.
In many areas, people can visit parks, trails, and open spaces as a way to relieve stress, get some fresh air and vitamin D, stay active, and safely connect with others.
Know Before You Go: While these facilities and areas can offer health benefits, it is important that you follow the steps below to protect yourself and others from COVID-19.
check icon Visit parks that are close to your home
check icon Prepare before you visit
check icon Stay at least 6 feet away from others (social distancing) and take other steps to prevent COVID-19
check icon Play it safe around and in swimming pools.
Keep space between yourself and others
times icon Visit parks if you are sick or were recently exposed to COVID-19
times icon Visit crowded parks
times icon Use playgrounds
times icon Use hot tubs, spas, water playgrounds, or water parks
times icon Participate in organized activities or sports.
Traveling long distances to visit a park may contribute to the spread of COVID-19 as:
State and local authorities will decide whether parks and other recreational facilities will open.
Check with the park in advance to be sure you know which areas or services are open, such as bathroom facilities and concessions, and bring what you need with you.
The National Park Serviceexternal iconexternal icon will decide on a park-by-park basis whether a national park will be open.
Please check with individual parksexternal iconexternal icon for specific details since, in many cases, visitor centers, concessions, and bathroom facilities might be closed.
State and local authorities will decide whether natural bodies of water and beaches or swim areas will be open.
Please check with individual beaches or swim areas for specific details.
If a park, beach, or recreational facility is open for public use, visiting is okay as long as you practice social distancing and everyday steps such as washing hands often and covering coughs and sneezes.
Follow these actions when visiting a park, beach, or recreational facility:
Do not use playgrounds, including water playgrounds, located within local, state, or national parks.
Using playgrounds might lead to the spread of COVID-19 because:
In general, most organized activities and sports such as basketball, baseball, soccer, and football that are held on park fields, open areas, and courts are not recommended.
These activities and sports typically require coaches and athletes who are not from the same household or living unit to be in close proximity, which increases their potential for exposure to COVID-19.
There is no evidence that COVID-19 can be spread to humans through the water.
Proper operation, maintenance, and disinfection (with chlorine or bromine) of pools should kill COVID-19.
Swimming and other water-related activities are excellent ways to get the physical activity needed for a healthy life.
If you are not sick or experiencing symptoms of COVID-19, it is safe to use swimming pools as long as steps are taken to reduce the spread of COVID-19:
Swimming does carry some health risks.
Visit CDCs Healthy Swimming website for information to help you prevent illness and drowning, while having fun and enjoying the health benefits of swimming.
While proper operation, maintenance, and disinfection (with chlorine or bromine) should kill COVID-19 in hot tubs, spas, water playgrounds, and water parks, you should not use these facilities within local, state, or national parks at this time because:
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses.
Some coronaviruses cause cold-like illnesses in people, while others cause illness in certain types of animals, such as cattle, camels, and bats.
Some coronaviruses, such as canine and feline coronaviruses, infect only animals and do not infect humans.
Some coronaviruses that infect animals can sometimes be spread to humans and then spread between people, but this is rare.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) are examples of diseases caused by coronaviruses that originated in animals and spread to people.
This is what is suspected to have happened with the virus that caused the current outbreak of COVID-19.
However, we do not know the exact source of this virus.
Public health officials and partners are working hard to identify the source of COVID-19.
The first infections were linked to a live animal market, but the virus is now spreading from person to person.
The coronavirus most similar to the virus causing COVID-19 is the one that causes SARS.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, and talking.
Recent studies show that people who are infected but do not have symptoms likely also play a role in the spread of COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reportedexternal icon to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Only a few of the animals reported to be positive showed signs of illness.
The first caseexternal icon in the United States of an animal testing positive for the virus that causes COVID-19 was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
Samples from this tiger were collected and tested after several lions and tigers at the zoo showed signs of respiratory illness.
Public health officials believe these large cats became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
This investigation is ongoing.
We are still learning about this virus, but we know that it originally came from an animal source and is primarily spreading from person-to-person, but  it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
CDC is working with human and animal health partners to monitor this situation and will continue to provide updates as information becomes available.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by COVID-19.
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from a possible infection.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian if your pet gets sick or if you have any concerns about your pets health.
If you are sick with COVID-19 (either suspected or confirmed by a test), you should restrict contact with your pets and other animals, just like you would with people.
Until we know more about this virus, people sick with COVID-19 should avoid contact with pets and other animals.
If you are sick with COVID-19 and your pet becomes sick, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know you have been sick with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
For more information visit: What to Do if You are Sick.
In the United States, there is no evidence that animals are playing a significant role in the spread of COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low..
However, because all animals can carry germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals.
For more information, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
If you have a fever or cough, you might have COVID-19.
Most people have mild illness and are able to recover at home.
If you think you may have been exposed to COVID-19, contact your healthcare provider immediately.
A guide to help you make decisions and seek appropriate medical care
Follow the steps below:  If you are sick with COVID-19 or think you might have COVID-19, follow the steps below to care for yourself and to help protect other people in your home and community.
As much as possible, stay in a specific room and away from other people and pets in your home.
Also, you should use a separate bathroom, if available.
If you need to be around other people or animals in or outside of the home, wear a cloth face covering.
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Note: During the COVID-19 pandemic, medical grade facemasks are reserved for healthcare workers and some first responders.
You may need to improvise a cloth face covering using a scarf or bandana.
High-touch surfaces include phones, remote controls, counters, tabletops, doorknobs, bathroom fixtures, toilets, keyboards, tablets, and bedside tables.
People with COVID-19 who have stayed home (home isolated) can stop home isolation under the following conditions:
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
The decision to stop home isolation should be made in consultation with your healthcare provider and state and local health departments.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
For any additional questions about your care, contact your healthcare provider or state or local health department.
There is no specific antiviral treatment recommended for COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 should receive supportive care to help relieve symptoms.
For severe cases, treatment should include care to support vital organ functions.
What you can do if you have possible or confirmed COVID-19:
If you are caring for someone with COVID-19 in non-healthcare settings, follow this advice to protect yourself and others.
Learn what to do when someone has symptoms of COVID-19 or when someone has been diagnosed with the virus.
This information also pertains to people who have tested positive but are not showing symptoms.
*Note: Older adults and people of any age with serious underlying medical conditions, such as chronic lung disease, serious heart conditions, or diabetes, are at higher risk for developing more severe illness from COVID-19.
People at higher risk of severe illness should call their doctor as soon as symptoms start.
People who develop emergency warning signs for COVID-19 should  call 911 right away.
Emergency warning signs include*:
*This is not every emergency symptom or sign.
COVID-19 spreads between people who are in close contact (within about 6 feet) through respiratory droplets, created when someone talks, coughs or sneezes
Avoid having visitors: Avoid having any unnecessary visitors, especially visits by people who are at higher risk for severe illness.
Clean hands after taking off gloves or handling used items.
Note: During the COVID-19 pandemic, medical grade facemasks are reserved for healthcare workers and some first responders.
You may need to improvise a cloth face covering using a scarf or bandana.
Learn more here.
can leave their sick room and home when:
can leave their sick room and home when:
can leave their sick room and home when:
For 3 more days, this group of people should continue to limit contact (stay 6 feet or more away from others) and wear a face covering for their nose and mouth when other people are present (including at home).
Follow guidance provided by the healthcare provider and local health department.
The decision to stop home isolation will be made in consultation with their healthcare provider and state and local health departments.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Find more information on when to end home isolation.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
Older adults and people who have severe underlying medical conditions like heart or lung disease or diabetes seem to be at higher risk for developing more serious complications from COVID-19 illness.
There are things you can do to reduce your risk of getting sick.
You may feel increased stress during this pandemic.
Fear and anxiety can be overwhelming and cause strong emotions.
Learn about stress and coping.
Symptoms of COVID-19 can range from mild symptoms to severe illness and death.
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure.
Watch for fever, cough, and shortness of breath.
Watch for symptoms.
A care plan summarizes your health conditions, medications, healthcare providers, emergency contacts, and end-of-life care options (for example, advance directives).
Complete your care plan in consultation with your doctor, and if needed, with help from a family member or home nurse aide.
A care plan can have benefits beyond the current pandemic.
You can update your care plan every year, or any time you have a change in your health or medications.
Care plans can help reduce emergency room visits and hospitalizations, and improve overall medical management for people with a chronic health condition, resulting in better quality of life.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, having a care plan is an important part of emergency preparedness.
People with loved ones in nursing homes, assisted living facilities, and other types of senior living facilities may be understandably concerned about their loved ones risk of illness from COVID-19.
To protect these vulnerable friends and family members, CDC has advised that long-term care facilities
8 out of 10 deaths reported in the U.S. have been in adults 65 years old and older.
See below for estimated percent of adults with confirmed COVID-19 reported in the U.S:
Preventative actions to help protect older adults.
Experts share information about how to protect yourself
Learn what you can do to protect yourself.
This information is based on what we currently know about the spread and severity of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
People with moderate to severe asthma may be at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19.
COVID-19 can affect your respiratory tract (nose, throat, lungs), cause an asthma attack, and possibly lead to pneumonia and acute respiratory disease.
There is currently no specific treatment for or vaccine to prevent COVID-19.
The best way to prevent illness is to avoid being exposed to this virus.
Contact your health care provider to ask about your symptoms.
Although the risk of serious illness from COVID-19 for people with HIV is not known, people with HIV may have concerns and questions related to their risk.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will provide updated information as it becomes available.
At the present time, we have no specific information about the risk of COVID-19 in people with HIV.
Older adults and people of any age who have a serious underlying medical condition might be at higher risk for severe illness, including people who are immunocompromised.
The risk for people with HIV getting very sick is greatest in:
People with HIV can also be at increased risk of getting very sick with COVID-19 based on their age and other medical conditions.
There is currently no vaccine to prevent COVID-19.
The best way to prevent getting sick is to avoid exposure to the virus.
People with HIV should take everyday preventive actions to help prevent the spread of COVID-19.
People with HIV should also continue to maintain a healthy lifestyle.
This includes:
Staying healthy helps your immune system fight off infection should it occur.
If you have HIV and are taking your HIV medicine, it is important to continue your treatment and follow the advice of your health care provider.
This is the best way to keep your immune system healthy.
Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms that could be consistent with COVID-19.
Discuss how to get evaluated and how to avoid potentially exposing others to COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19 and what to do if you get sick.
Nearly half of people in the United States with diagnosed HIV are aged 50 years and older.
People with HIV also have higher rates of certain underlying health conditions.
Both increased age and these conditions can increase their risk for more severe illness if people with HIV get COVID-19, especially people with advanced HIV.
Steps that people with HIV can take to prepare in addition to what is recommended for everybody:
Some types of HIV medicine (for example, lopinavir-ritonavir) to treat COVID-19 are being evaluated.
Results from a clinical trialexternal icon in China showed that lopinavir-ritonavir did not speed up recovery or reduce the amount of virus produced in patients hospitalized with COVID-19 and pneumonia.
More than 15 clinical trials of HIV medicines are registered on ClinicalTrials.govexternal icon.
Until more is known about the effects of these medicines on COVID-19, people with HIV should not switch their HIV medicine in an attempt to prevent or treat COVID-19.
Drug shortages or anticipated problems with HIV medicine have not been identified.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is closely monitoring the drug supply chain as the COVID-19 outbreak has the potential to disrupt the supply of medical and pharmaceutical products in the United States.
The National Alliance of State and Territorial AIDS Directors (NASTAD) has also remained in contact with the major manufacturers of HIV medicine as many of these products rely on ingredients produced in China.
As of March 10, 2020, there were no reports of manufacturing concerns or supply shortages.
Learn more about the FDAs response to COVID-19external icon.
For the latest CDC travel recommendations, visit CDCs COVID-19 travel information page.
Minimizing stigma and misinformation about COVID-19 is very important.
People with HIV have experience in dealing with stigma and can be allies in preventing COVID-19 stigma.
Learn how you can reduce stigma and help prevent the spread of rumors about COVID-19.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe illness.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
We are learning more about COVID-19 every day; CDC will update the advice below as new information becomes available.
Learn what else you can do as someone who may be at higher risk for severe illness, including staying home and away from other people as much as possible.
Moderate-to-severe asthma may put people at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
COVID-19 can affect your respiratory tract (nose, throat, lungs), cause an asthma attack, and possibly lead to pneumonia and serious illness.
Chronic lung diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (including emphysema and chronic bronchitis), idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and cystic fibrosis, may put people at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
Based on data from other viral respiratory infections, COVID-19 might cause flare-ups of chronic lung diseases leading to severe illness.
Diabetes, including type 1, type 2, or gestational, may put people at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
People with diabetes whose blood sugar levels are often higher than their target are more likely to have diabetes-related health problems.
Those health problems can make it harder to overcome COVID-19.
Serious heart conditions, including heart failure, coronary artery disease, congenital heart disease, cardiomyopathies, and pulmonary hypertension, may put people at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
COVID-19, like other viral illnesses such as the flu, can damage the respiratory system and make it harder for your heart to work.
For people with heart failure and other serious heart conditions this can lead to a worsening of COVID-19 symptoms.
Chronic kidney disease being treated with dialysis may increase a persons risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
Dialysis patients are more prone to infection and severe illness because of weakened immune systems; treatments and procedures to manage kidney failure; and coexisting conditions such as diabetes.
Severe obesity, defined as a body mass index (BMI) of 40 or above, puts people at higher risk for complications from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
Severe obesity increases the risk of a serious breathing problem called acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which is a major complication of COVID-19 and can cause difficulties with a doctors ability to provide respiratory support for seriously ill patients.
People living with severe obesity can have multiple serious chronic diseases and underlying health conditions that can increase the risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
Older adults, 65 years and older, are at higher risk for severe illness and death from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
Although COVID-19 can affect any group, the older you are, the higher your risk of serious disease.
Eight out of 10 deaths reported in the U.S. have been in adults 65 years or older; risk of death is highest among those 85 years or older.
The immune systems of older adults weaken with age, making it harder to fight off infections.
Also, older adults commonly have chronic diseases that can increase the risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
Many cases of COVID-19 in the U.S. have occurred among older adults living in nursing homes or long-term care facilities
Why you might be at higher risk
The communal nature of nursing homes and long-term care facilities, and the population served (generally older adults often with underlying medical conditions), put those living in nursing homes at higher risk of infection and severe illness from COVID-19.
Many conditions and treatments can cause a person to have a weakened immune system (immunocompromised), including cancer treatment, bone marrow or organ transplantation, immune deficiencies, HIV with a low CD4 cell count or not on HIV treatment, and prolonged use of corticosteroids and other immune weakening medications.
Why you might be at higher risk
People with a weakened immune system have reduced ability to fight infectious diseases, including viruses like COVID-19.
Knowledge is limited about the virus that causes COVID-19, but based on similar viruses, there is concern that immunocompromised patients may remain infectious for longer than other COVID-19 patients.
Chronic liver disease, including cirrhosis, may increase risk for serious illness from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
Severe illness caused by COVID-19 and the medications used to treat some severe consequences of COVID-19 can cause strain on the liver, particularly for those with underlying liver problems.
People living with serious liver disease can have a weakened immune system, leaving the body less able to fight COVID-19.
Moderate-to-severe asthma may put people at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
COVID-19 can affect your respiratory tract (nose, throat, lungs), cause an asthma attack, and possibly lead to pneumonia and serious illness.
Chronic lung diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (including emphysema and chronic bronchitis), idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and cystic fibrosis, may put people at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
Based on data from other viral respiratory infections, COVID-19 might cause flare-ups of chronic lung diseases leading to severe illness.
Diabetes, including type 1, type 2, or gestational, may put people at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
People with diabetes whose blood sugar levels are often higher than their target are more likely to have diabetes-related health problems.
Those health problems can make it harder to overcome COVID-19.
Serious heart conditions, including heart failure, coronary artery disease, congenital heart disease, cardiomyopathies, and pulmonary hypertension, may put people at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
COVID-19, like other viral illnesses such as the flu, can damage the respiratory system and make it harder for your heart to work.
For people with heart failure and other serious heart conditions this can lead to a worsening of COVID-19 symptoms.
Chronic kidney disease being treated with dialysis may increase a persons risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
Dialysis patients are more prone to infection and severe illness because of weakened immune systems; treatments and procedures to manage kidney failure; and coexisting conditions such as diabetes.
Why you might be at higher risk
Severe obesity increases the risk of a serious breathing problem called acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which is a major complication of COVID-19 and can cause difficulties with a doctors ability to provide respiratory support for seriously ill patients.
People living with severe obesity can have multiple serious chronic diseases and underlying health conditions that can increase the risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
Older adults, 65 years and older, are at higher risk for severe illness and death from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
Although COVID-19 can affect any group, the older you are, the higher your risk of serious disease.
Eight out of 10 deaths reported in the U.S. have been in adults 65 years or older; risk of death is highest among those 85 years or older.
The immune systems of older adults weaken with age, making it harder to fight off infections.
Also, older adults commonly have chronic diseases that can increase the risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
Many cases of COVID-19 in the U.S. have occurred among older adults living in nursing homes or long-term care facilities
Why you might be at higher risk
The communal nature of nursing homes and long-term care facilities, and the population served (generally older adults often with underlying medical conditions), put those living in nursing homes at higher risk of infection and severe illness from COVID-19.
Many conditions and treatments can cause a person to have a weakened immune system (immunocompromised), including cancer treatment, bone marrow or organ transplantation, immune deficiencies, HIV with a low CD4 cell count or not on HIV treatment, and prolonged use of corticosteroids and other immune weakening medications.
Why you might be at higher risk
People with a weakened immune system have reduced ability to fight infectious diseases, including viruses like COVID-19.
Knowledge is limited about the virus that causes COVID-19, but based on similar viruses, there is concern that immunocompromised patients may remain infectious for longer than other COVID-19 patients.
Chronic liver disease, including cirrhosis, may increase risk for serious illness from COVID-19.
Why you might be at higher risk
Severe illness caused by COVID-19 and the medications used to treat some severe consequences of COVID-19 can cause strain on the liver, particularly for those with underlying liver problems.
People living with serious liver disease can have a weakened immune system, leaving the body less able to fight COVID-19.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads, the severity of illness it causes, and to what extent it may spread in the United States.
Disability alone may not be related to higher risk for getting COVID-19 or having severe illness.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
However, some people with disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection or severe illness because of their underlying medical conditions.
All people seem to be at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19 if they have serious underlying chronic medical conditions like chronic lung disease, a serious heart condition, or a weakened immune system.
Adults with disabilities are three times more likely than adults without disabilities to have heart disease, stroke, diabetes, or cancer than adults without disabilities.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
If you have one of the disability types listed below, you might be at increased risk of becoming infected or having unrecognized illness.
You should discuss your risk of illness with your healthcare provider.
If you or someone you care for are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, take steps to prevent getting sick.
In addition to practicing everyday preventive actions, people with disabilities who have direct support providers can help protect themselves from respiratory illness in the following ways:
There are some additional things people with disabilities can do to prepare during the COVID-19 outbreak:
There is currently no vaccine to protect against COVID-19.
The best way to prevent infection is to take everyday preventive actions, like avoiding close contact with people who are sick and washing your hands often.
There is no specific antiviral treatment for COVID-19.
People with COVID-19 can seek medical care to help relieve symptoms.
People who are homeless are at risk of COVID-19.
Homeless services are often provided in congregate settings, which could facilitate the spread of infection.
Because many people who are homeless are older adults or have underlying medical conditions, they may also be at higher risk for severe disease.
Health departments and healthcare facilities should be aware that people who are homeless are a particularly vulnerable group.
If possible, identifying non-congregate settings where those at highest risk can stay may help protect them from COVID-19.
Many of the recommendations to prevent COVID-19 may be difficult for a person experiencing homelessness to do.
Although it may not be possible to avoid certain crowded locations (such as shelters), people who are homeless should:
Any person experiencing homelessness with symptoms consistent with COVID-19  (fever, cough, or shortness of breath) should alert their service providers (such as case managers, shelter staff, and other care providers).
These staff will help the individual understand how to isolate themselves and identify options for medical care as needed.
If they meet criteria for testing, people experiencing homelessness will access COVID-19 testing through a healthcare provider.
Local public health and healthcare facilities need to determine the best location for this testing in coordination with homeless healthcare clinics and street medicine clinics.
Those with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 should stay in a place where they can best be isolated from other people to prevent spreading the infection.
Local health departments, housing authorities, homeless service systems, and healthcare facilities should plan to identify locations to isolate those with known or suspected COVID-19 until they meet the criteria to end isolation.
Isolation housing could be units designated by local authorities or shelters determined to have capacity to sufficiently isolate these people.
If no other options are available, homeless service providers should plan for how they can help people isolate themselves while efforts are underway to provide additional support.
Homeless service providers can accept donations of food and clothing during community spread of COVID-19, but general infection control precautions should be taken.
Request that donors not donate if they are sick.
Homeless shelters can screen clients for symptoms of respiratory infections.
Clients who have symptoms may or may not have COVID-19.
Make sure they have a separate place they can safely stay within the shelter or at an alternate site in coordination with local health authorities.
An on-site nurse or other clinical staff can help with clinical assessments.
Notify the designated medical facility and personnel to transfer clients that the client might have COVID-19.
Homeless shelters serve a critical function in our communities.
Shelters should stay open unless homeless service providers, health departments, and housing authorities have determined together that a shelter needs to close.
Connecting people to stable housing should continue to be a priority.
More details: Interim Guidance for Homeless Service Providers
We do not currently know if pregnant people have a greater chance of getting sick from COVID-19 than the general public nor whether they are more likely to have serious illness as a result.
Based on available information, pregnant people seem to have the same risk as adults who are not pregnant.
Related: How to Protect Yourself
The effects of COVID-19 on the health of racial and ethnic minority groups is still emerging; however, current data suggest a disproportionate burden of illness and death among racial and ethnic minority groups.
A recent CDC MMWR report included race and ethnicity data from 580 patients hospitalized with lab-confirmed COVID-19 found that 45% of individuals for whom race or ethnicity data was available were white, compared to 55% of individuals in the surrounding community.
However, 33% of hospitalized patients were black compared to 18% in the community and 8% were Hispanic, compared to 14% in the community.
These data suggest an overrepresentation of blacks among hospitalized patients.
Among COVID-19 deaths for which race and ethnicity data were available, New York Citypdf iconexternal icon identified death rates among Black/African American persons (92.3 deaths per 100,000 population) and Hispanic/Latino persons (74.3) that were substantially higher than that of white (45.2) or Asian (34.5) persons.
Studies are underway to confirm these data and understand and potentially reduce the impact of COVID-19 on the health of racial and ethnic minorities.
Where We Live, Learn,
Work, and Play Affects Our Health
The conditions in which people live, learn, work, and play contribute to their health.
These conditions, over time, lead to different levels of health risks, needs, and outcomes among some people in certain racial and ethnic minority groups.
Health differences between racial and ethnic groups are often due to economic and social conditions that are more common among some racial and ethnic minorities than whites.
In public health emergencies, these conditions can also isolate people from the resources they need to prepare for and respond to outbreaks.1,13, 14
For many people in racial and ethnic minority groups, living conditions may contribute to underlying health conditions and make it difficult to follow steps to prevent getting sick with COVID-19 or to seek treatment if they do get sick.
The types of work and policies in the work environments where people in some racial and ethnic groups are overrepresented can also contribute to their risk for getting sick with COVID-19.
Examples include:
Existing health disparities, such as poorer underlying health and barriers to getting health care, might make members of many racial and ethnic minority groups especially vulnerable in public health emergencies like outbreaks of COVID-19.
History shows that severe illness and death rates tend to be higher for racial and ethnic minority groups during public health emergencies.12 Addressing the needs of vulnerable populations in emergencies includes improving day-to-day life and harnessing the strengths of these groups.
Shared faith, family, and cultural institutions are common sources of social support.
These institutions can empower and encourage individuals and communities to take actions to prevent the spread of COVID-19, care for those who become sick, and help community members cope with stress.
For example, families, churches and other groups in affected populations can help their communities face an epidemic by consulting CDC guidance documents for their organization type.
Stay home and avoid close contact, especially if you are at higher risk of severe illness or if you may have issues getting assistance if you get sick.
If you are at higher risk for serious illness from COVID-19 because of your age or because you have a serious long-term health problem, it is extra important for you to take actions to reduce your risk of getting sick with the disease.
Related: How to Protect Yourself
Older people and people of any age who have serious underlying health conditions are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
People who may have issues getting assistance if they become ill, like those experiencing homelessness or people with disabilities are also at increased risk from COVID-19.
These conditions and situations may result in increased stress during this pandemic.
Fear and anxiety can be overwhelming and cause strong emotions.
Things you can do to support yourself:
Related: Cleaning and Disinfecting Your Home
Depending on how severe the outbreak is, your local public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce peoples risk of being exposed to COVID-19.
These actions can slow the spread and reduce the impact of disease.
Stay home as much as possible.
Take extra measures to put distance between yourself and other people to further reduce your risk of being exposed to this new virus.
Related: List of Local Health Departments
Watch for symptoms and emergency warning signs.
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning.
Related: Symptoms and Testing | What to do if You Are Sick
Community preparedness planning for COVID-19 should include older adults and people with disabilities, and the organizations that support them in their communities, to ensure their needs are taken into consideration.
Many of these individuals live in the community, and many depend on services and supports provided in their homes or in the community to maintain their health and independence.
Long-term care facilities should be vigilant to prevent the introduction and spread of COVID-19.
See guidance for long-term care facilities.
Related: Schools, Workplaces, and Community Locations
Related: If you are Sick or Caring for Someone
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal iconexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading.
Some people are worried about getting the disease from these people.
Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, toward people who live in certain parts of the world, people who have traveled internationally, people who were in quarantine, or healthcare professionals.
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
People can fight stigma by providing social support in situations where you notice this is occurring.
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient.
See resources on mental health and coping during COVID-19.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
CDCs COVID-19 case numbers include many publicly reported numbers, including information from state, local, territorial, international and external partners.
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in people and may different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people.
This occurred with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and now with the virus that causes COVID-19.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
All three of these viruses have their origins in bats.
The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initially posted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.
However, the exact source of this virus is unknown.
More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.
The number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The growing number of cases in part reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person.
People are thought to be most contagious when they are symptomatic (the sickest).
That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
More recently the virus has also been detected in asymptomatic persons.
How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made using a test-based or non-test-based strategy (i.e.
time since illness started and time since recovery) in consultation with state and local public health officials.
The decision involves considering the specifics of each situation, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and the results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Learn more about CDCs guidance on when to release someone from isolation and discharge hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
For information on when someone who has been sick with COVID-19 is able to stop home isolation see Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19.
Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease.
Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure.
For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure because the incubation period for this virus is 2 to 14 days.
Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets.
Currently, there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food.
Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds for general food safety.
Throughout the day use a tissue to cover your coughing or sneezing, and wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, like a packaging container, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging.
Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.
Based on information about this novel coronavirus thus far, it seems unlikely that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food – additional investigation is needed.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Generally coronaviruses survive for shorter periods at higher temperatures and higher humidity than in cooler or dryer environments.
However, we dont have direct data for this virus, nor do we have direct data for a temperature-based cutoff for inactivation at this point.
The necessary temperature would also be based on the materials of the surface, the environment, etc.
Regardless of temperature please follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfection.
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the risk assessment may change daily.
The latest updates are available on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) website.
COVID-19 case counts for the United States are updated regularly online.
See the current U.S. case count of COVID-19.
Visit the COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
There is information for people who have had close contact with a person confirmed to have, or being evaluated for, COVID-19 available online.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people must go into public settings (grocery stores, for example).
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
You can learn more about who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 at People who are at higher risk for severe illness.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at Prevention for 2019 Novel Coronavirus and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
More information on Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally presented with mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is much more to be learned about how the disease impacts children.
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a cloth face covering that covers their nose and mouth when they are out in the community.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the face covering without assistance.
Wearing cloth face coverings is a public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning ,and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical face masks and N95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare personnel and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
If appropriate, explain to them that most illness from COVID-19 seems to be mild.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
CDC offers resources to help talk with children about COVID-19.
This is a new virus and we are still learning about it, but so far, there does not seem to be a lot of illness in children.
Most illness, including serious illness, is happening in adults of working age and older adults.
However, children do get the virus and become ill.
Many schools across the country have announced dismissals for temporary periods.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Children with complex, chronic medical conditions, including children with physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional differences, can have special healthcare needs.
Its not known yet whether all of these children are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing cloth face coverings, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on ways to cope with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19:
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Practice everyday preventive actions to help reduce your risk of getting sick and remind everyone in your home to do the same.
These actions are especially important for older adults and people who have severe chronic medical conditions:
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Talk to the school or facility about their emergency operations plan.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
CDC recommends handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or, using alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available.
These actions are part of everyday preventive actions individuals can take to slow the spread of respiratory diseases like COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal iconexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidancepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
See FAQs about hand hygiene for healthcare personnel responding to COVID-2019.
During an outbreak, stay calm and put your preparedness plan to work.
Follow the steps below:
Put your household plan into action.
Depending on the situation, public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19, such as school dismissals.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or and watch for communication from your childs school.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Follow the advice of your local health officials.
Stay home if you can.
Talk to your employer to discuss working from home, taking leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
Employers should be aware that more employees may need to stay at home to care for sick children or other sick family members than is usual in case of a community outbreak.
CDC makes recommendations, shares information, and provides guidance to help slow down the spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. including guidance for schools and businesses.
CDC regularly shares information and provides assistance to state, local, territorial, and tribal health authorities.
These local authorities are responsible for making decisions including  stay at home or shelter in place.
What is included in these orders and how they are implemented are also decided by local authorities.
These decisions may also depend on many factors such as how the virus is spreading in a certain community.
Please contact your local health department to find out more.
CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
Employers, schools, and organizations may decide to visibly screen for symptoms or perform on-site symptom checks.
If your employer, school, or organization requires you to present documentation regarding COVID-19 before returning to work or school (for example, proof of a negative COVID-19 lab test, if a test was performed, contact your healthcare provider to ask if he or she would be able to provide a form of documentation for you.
Documentation of self-isolation and self-quarantine may not be possible.
CDC has guidance for when and how people with COVID-19 can discontinue home isolation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html.
CDC also has guidance for what people should do if they think they have been exposed or feel sick: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Current symptoms reported for patients with COVID-19 have included mild to severe respiratory illness with fever1, cough, and difficulty breathing.
Read about COVID-19 Symptoms.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
For information about testing, see Testing for COVID-19.
The process and locations for testing vary from place to place.
Contact your state, local, tribal, or territorial department for more information, or reach out to a medical provider.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC while medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find someplace to get tested.
See Testing for COVID-19 for more information.
Using the CDC-developed diagnostic test, a negative result means that the virus that causes COVID-19 was not found in the persons sample.
In the early stages of infection, it is possible the virus will not be detected.
For COVID-19, a negative test result for a sample collected while a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID-19 virus is not causing their current illness.
There are actually many tests being used to diagnose COVID-19 that the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
All of these diagnostic tests identify the virus in samples from the respiratory system, such as from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs.
Some tests are conducted at the testing site you visit, and results are available to you within minutes.
Other tests must be sent to a laboratory to analyze, a process that takes 1-2 days once the lab receives your samples.
Locations and types of testing sites vary depending on where you live (see question: Where can I get tested).
Check with your testing site to learn which test it uses.
You can find a patient information sheet about each test on the FDA websiteexternal icon.
In the coming weeks, healthcare providers in most states will begin offering home collection kits, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
A healthcare provider will need to give you the approved kit – the Pixel by LabCorp COVID-19 test home collection kit.
You will be able to collect your sample (a nasal swab) at home and then send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
For more information please see FDAs most recent press releaseexternal icon.
Serology testing checks a sample of a persons blood to look for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
These antibodies are produced when someone has been infected, so a positive result from this test indicates that person was previously infected with the virus.
CDC is working with other federal agencies to evaluate the performance of commercially manufactured serology tests that are becoming increasingly available from healthcare providers.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
We do not know yet if the antibodies that result from infection with SARS-CoV-2 can protect someone from reinfection with this virus or how long antibodies to the virus will protect someone.
Scientists are conducting research to answer those questions.
Serology tests may not be able to tell you if you are currently infected because it typically takes 1 to 2 weeks to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
To tell if you are currently infected, you would need a test that identifies the virus in samples from your upper respiratory system, such as a nasopharyngeal swab.
CDC and partners are investigating to determine if you can get sick with COVID-19 more than once.
At this time, we are not sure if you can become re-infected.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
If you are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, you should:
If there is an outbreak in your community, stay home as much as possible.
Watch for symptoms and emergency signs.
If you get sick, stay home and call your doctor.
More information on how to prepare, what to do if you get sick, and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on People at Risk for Serious Illness from COVID-19.
As CDC gets more information about COVID-19 cases here in the United States, we will update this list as needed.
Currently, there is no evidence to show that taking ibuprofen or naproxen can lead to a more severe infection of COVID-19.
People with high blood pressure should take their blood pressure medications, as directed, and work with their healthcare provider to make sure that their blood pressure is as well controlled as possible.
Any changes to your medications should only be made by your healthcare provider.
Based on available information, adults aged 65 years and older and people of any age with underlying medical conditions included on this list are at higher risk for severe illness and poorer outcomes from COVID-19.
CDC is collecting and analyzing data regularly and will update the list when we learn more.
People with underlying medical conditions not on the list might also be at higher risk and should consult with their healthcare provider if they are concerned.
We encourage all people, regardless of risk, to:
Generally, well-controlled means that your condition is stable, not life-threatening, and laboratory assessments and other findings are as similar as possible to those without the health condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Severity typically means how much impact the illness or condition has on your bodys function.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control, including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigation, see Information for Healthcare Professionals.
For information on specimen collection and shipment, see Information for Laboratories.
For information for public health professional on COVID-19, see Information for Public Health Professionals.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread from close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) with a person who is currently sick with COVID-19.
The virus likely spreads primarily through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, similar to how influenza and other respiratory infections spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N-95 respirator).
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
After removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
A funeral or visitation service can be held for a person who has died of COVID-19.
Funeral home workers should follow their routine infection prevention and control precautions when handling a decedent who died of COVID-19.
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
For transporting a body after the body has been bagged, disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Embalming can be conducted.
During embalming, follow Standard Precautions including the use of additional PPE if splashing is expected (e.g.
disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N95 respirator).
Wear appropriate respiratory protection if any procedures will generate aerosols or if required for chemicals used in accordance with the manufacturers label.
Wear heavy-duty gloves over nitrile disposable gloves if there is a risk of cuts, puncture wounds, or other injuries that break the skin.
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
After cleaning and removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water is not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
Decedents with COVID-19 can be buried or cremated, but check for any additional state and local requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the remains of individuals who have died of certain infectious diseases.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
CDC is working with other federal partners in a whole-of-government response.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes available.
CDC works 24/7 to protect peoples health.
More information about CDCs response to COVID-19 is available online.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
A small number of pets have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after contact with people with COVID-19.
Pets have other types of coronaviruses that can make them sick, like canine and feline coronaviruses.
These other coronaviruses cannot infect people and are not related to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
No.
At this time, routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Until we learn more about this new coronavirus, you should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would with people.
When possible, have another member of your household care for your animals while you are sick.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a cloth face covering.
We dont know for sure which animals can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
A tiger at a zoo in New York has also tested positive for the virus.
Recent research shows that ferrets, cats, and golden Syrian hamsters can be experimentally infected with the virus and can spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Pigs, chickens, and ducks did not become infected or spread the infection based on results from these studies.
Data from one study suggested dogs are not as likely to become infected with the virus as cats and ferrets.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus that causes COVID-19 and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus and how it spreads, but it appears it can spread from humans to animals in some situations.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Most of these animals had contact with a person with COVID-19.
A tiger at a New York zoo has also tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person, typically through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
People sick with COVID-19 should isolate themselves from other people and animals, including pets, during their illness until we know more about how this virus affects animals.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a cloth face covering and wash your hands before and after you interact with pets.
Walking a dog is important for both animal and human health and well-being.
Walk dogs on a leash, maintaining at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other people and animals, do not gather in groups, and stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings.
Do not go to dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather.
To help maintain social distancing, do not let other people pet your dog when you are out for a walk.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Animals are only being tested in very rare circumstances.
Routine testing of animals is not recommended at this time, and any tests done on animals are done on a case by case basis.
For example, if the pet of a COVID-19 patient has a new, concerning illness with symptoms similar to those of COVID-19, the animals veterinarian might consult with public health and animal health officials to determine if testing is needed.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
There is no reason to think that any animals, including shelter pets, play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
The first case of a wild animal testing positive for the virus in the United States was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
However, this tiger was in a captive zoo environment ,and public health officials believe the tiger became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected and spreading the virus.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal iconexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading.
Some people are worried about getting the disease from these people.
Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, toward people who live in certain parts of the world, people who have traveled internationally, people who were in quarantine, or healthcare professionals.
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
People can fight stigma by providing social support in situations where you notice this is occurring.
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient.
See resources on mental health and coping during COVID-19.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
CDCs COVID-19 case numbers include many publicly reported numbers, including information from state, local, territorial, international and external partners.
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in people and may different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people.
This occurred with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and now with the virus that causes COVID-19.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
All three of these viruses have their origins in bats.
The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initially posted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.
However, the exact source of this virus is unknown.
More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.
The number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The growing number of cases in part reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person.
People are thought to be most contagious when they are symptomatic (the sickest).
That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
More recently the virus has also been detected in asymptomatic persons.
How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made using a test-based or non-test-based strategy (i.e.
time since illness started and time since recovery) in consultation with state and local public health officials.
The decision involves considering the specifics of each situation, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and the results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Learn more about CDCs guidance on when to release someone from isolation and discharge hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
For information on when someone who has been sick with COVID-19 is able to stop home isolation see Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19.
Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease.
Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure.
For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure because the incubation period for this virus is 2 to 14 days.
Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets.
Currently, there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food.
Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds for general food safety.
Throughout the day use a tissue to cover your coughing or sneezing, and wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, like a packaging container, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging.
Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.
Based on information about this novel coronavirus thus far, it seems unlikely that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food – additional investigation is needed.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Generally coronaviruses survive for shorter periods at higher temperatures and higher humidity than in cooler or dryer environments.
However, we dont have direct data for this virus, nor do we have direct data for a temperature-based cutoff for inactivation at this point.
The necessary temperature would also be based on the materials of the surface, the environment, etc.
Regardless of temperature please follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfection.
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the risk assessment may change daily.
The latest updates are available on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) website.
COVID-19 case counts for the United States are updated regularly online.
See the current U.S. case count of COVID-19.
Visit the COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
There is information for people who have had close contact with a person confirmed to have, or being evaluated for, COVID-19 available online.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people must go into public settings (grocery stores, for example).
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
You can learn more about who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 at People who are at higher risk for severe illness.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at Prevention for 2019 Novel Coronavirus and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
More information on Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally presented with mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is much more to be learned about how the disease impacts children.
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a cloth face covering that covers their nose and mouth when they are out in the community.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the face covering without assistance.
Wearing cloth face coverings is a public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning ,and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical face masks and N95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare personnel and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
If appropriate, explain to them that most illness from COVID-19 seems to be mild.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
CDC offers resources to help talk with children about COVID-19.
This is a new virus and we are still learning about it, but so far, there does not seem to be a lot of illness in children.
Most illness, including serious illness, is happening in adults of working age and older adults.
However, children do get the virus and become ill.
Many schools across the country have announced dismissals for temporary periods.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Children with complex, chronic medical conditions, including children with physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional differences, can have special healthcare needs.
Its not known yet whether all of these children are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing cloth face coverings, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on ways to cope with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19:
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Practice everyday preventive actions to help reduce your risk of getting sick and remind everyone in your home to do the same.
These actions are especially important for older adults and people who have severe chronic medical conditions:
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Talk to the school or facility about their emergency operations plan.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
CDC recommends handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or, using alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available.
These actions are part of everyday preventive actions individuals can take to slow the spread of respiratory diseases like COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal iconexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidancepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
See FAQs about hand hygiene for healthcare personnel responding to COVID-2019.
During an outbreak, stay calm and put your preparedness plan to work.
Follow the steps below:
Put your household plan into action.
Depending on the situation, public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19, such as school dismissals.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or and watch for communication from your childs school.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Follow the advice of your local health officials.
Stay home if you can.
Talk to your employer to discuss working from home, taking leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
Employers should be aware that more employees may need to stay at home to care for sick children or other sick family members than is usual in case of a community outbreak.
CDC makes recommendations, shares information, and provides guidance to help slow down the spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. including guidance for schools and businesses.
CDC regularly shares information and provides assistance to state, local, territorial, and tribal health authorities.
These local authorities are responsible for making decisions including  stay at home or shelter in place.
What is included in these orders and how they are implemented are also decided by local authorities.
These decisions may also depend on many factors such as how the virus is spreading in a certain community.
Please contact your local health department to find out more.
CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
Employers, schools, and organizations may decide to visibly screen for symptoms or perform on-site symptom checks.
If your employer, school, or organization requires you to present documentation regarding COVID-19 before returning to work or school (for example, proof of a negative COVID-19 lab test, if a test was performed, contact your healthcare provider to ask if he or she would be able to provide a form of documentation for you.
Documentation of self-isolation and self-quarantine may not be possible.
CDC has guidance for when and how people with COVID-19 can discontinue home isolation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html.
CDC also has guidance for what people should do if they think they have been exposed or feel sick: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Current symptoms reported for patients with COVID-19 have included mild to severe respiratory illness with fever1, cough, and difficulty breathing.
Read about COVID-19 Symptoms.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
For information about testing, see Testing for COVID-19.
The process and locations for testing vary from place to place.
Contact your state, local, tribal, or territorial department for more information, or reach out to a medical provider.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC while medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find someplace to get tested.
See Testing for COVID-19 for more information.
Using the CDC-developed diagnostic test, a negative result means that the virus that causes COVID-19 was not found in the persons sample.
In the early stages of infection, it is possible the virus will not be detected.
For COVID-19, a negative test result for a sample collected while a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID-19 virus is not causing their current illness.
There are actually many tests being used to diagnose COVID-19 that the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
All of these diagnostic tests identify the virus in samples from the respiratory system, such as from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs.
Some tests are conducted at the testing site you visit, and results are available to you within minutes.
Other tests must be sent to a laboratory to analyze, a process that takes 1-2 days once the lab receives your samples.
Locations and types of testing sites vary depending on where you live (see question: Where can I get tested).
Check with your testing site to learn which test it uses.
You can find a patient information sheet about each test on the FDA websiteexternal icon.
In the coming weeks, healthcare providers in most states will begin offering home collection kits, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
A healthcare provider will need to give you the approved kit – the Pixel by LabCorp COVID-19 test home collection kit.
You will be able to collect your sample (a nasal swab) at home and then send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
For more information please see FDAs most recent press releaseexternal icon.
Serology testing checks a sample of a persons blood to look for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
These antibodies are produced when someone has been infected, so a positive result from this test indicates that person was previously infected with the virus.
CDC is working with other federal agencies to evaluate the performance of commercially manufactured serology tests that are becoming increasingly available from healthcare providers.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
We do not know yet if the antibodies that result from infection with SARS-CoV-2 can protect someone from reinfection with this virus or how long antibodies to the virus will protect someone.
Scientists are conducting research to answer those questions.
Serology tests may not be able to tell you if you are currently infected because it typically takes 1 to 2 weeks to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
To tell if you are currently infected, you would need a test that identifies the virus in samples from your upper respiratory system, such as a nasopharyngeal swab.
CDC and partners are investigating to determine if you can get sick with COVID-19 more than once.
At this time, we are not sure if you can become re-infected.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
If you are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, you should:
If there is an outbreak in your community, stay home as much as possible.
Watch for symptoms and emergency signs.
If you get sick, stay home and call your doctor.
More information on how to prepare, what to do if you get sick, and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on People at Risk for Serious Illness from COVID-19.
As CDC gets more information about COVID-19 cases here in the United States, we will update this list as needed.
Currently, there is no evidence to show that taking ibuprofen or naproxen can lead to a more severe infection of COVID-19.
People with high blood pressure should take their blood pressure medications, as directed, and work with their healthcare provider to make sure that their blood pressure is as well controlled as possible.
Any changes to your medications should only be made by your healthcare provider.
Based on available information, adults aged 65 years and older and people of any age with underlying medical conditions included on this list are at higher risk for severe illness and poorer outcomes from COVID-19.
CDC is collecting and analyzing data regularly and will update the list when we learn more.
People with underlying medical conditions not on the list might also be at higher risk and should consult with their healthcare provider if they are concerned.
We encourage all people, regardless of risk, to:
Generally, well-controlled means that your condition is stable, not life-threatening, and laboratory assessments and other findings are as similar as possible to those without the health condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Severity typically means how much impact the illness or condition has on your bodys function.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control, including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigation, see Information for Healthcare Professionals.
For information on specimen collection and shipment, see Information for Laboratories.
For information for public health professional on COVID-19, see Information for Public Health Professionals.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread from close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) with a person who is currently sick with COVID-19.
The virus likely spreads primarily through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, similar to how influenza and other respiratory infections spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N-95 respirator).
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
After removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
A funeral or visitation service can be held for a person who has died of COVID-19.
Funeral home workers should follow their routine infection prevention and control precautions when handling a decedent who died of COVID-19.
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
For transporting a body after the body has been bagged, disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Embalming can be conducted.
During embalming, follow Standard Precautions including the use of additional PPE if splashing is expected (e.g.
disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N95 respirator).
Wear appropriate respiratory protection if any procedures will generate aerosols or if required for chemicals used in accordance with the manufacturers label.
Wear heavy-duty gloves over nitrile disposable gloves if there is a risk of cuts, puncture wounds, or other injuries that break the skin.
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
After cleaning and removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water is not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
Decedents with COVID-19 can be buried or cremated, but check for any additional state and local requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the remains of individuals who have died of certain infectious diseases.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
CDC is working with other federal partners in a whole-of-government response.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes available.
CDC works 24/7 to protect peoples health.
More information about CDCs response to COVID-19 is available online.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
A small number of pets have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after contact with people with COVID-19.
Pets have other types of coronaviruses that can make them sick, like canine and feline coronaviruses.
These other coronaviruses cannot infect people and are not related to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
No.
At this time, routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Until we learn more about this new coronavirus, you should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would with people.
When possible, have another member of your household care for your animals while you are sick.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a cloth face covering.
We dont know for sure which animals can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
A tiger at a zoo in New York has also tested positive for the virus.
Recent research shows that ferrets, cats, and golden Syrian hamsters can be experimentally infected with the virus and can spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Pigs, chickens, and ducks did not become infected or spread the infection based on results from these studies.
Data from one study suggested dogs are not as likely to become infected with the virus as cats and ferrets.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus that causes COVID-19 and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus and how it spreads, but it appears it can spread from humans to animals in some situations.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Most of these animals had contact with a person with COVID-19.
A tiger at a New York zoo has also tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person, typically through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
People sick with COVID-19 should isolate themselves from other people and animals, including pets, during their illness until we know more about how this virus affects animals.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a cloth face covering and wash your hands before and after you interact with pets.
Walking a dog is important for both animal and human health and well-being.
Walk dogs on a leash, maintaining at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other people and animals, do not gather in groups, and stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings.
Do not go to dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather.
To help maintain social distancing, do not let other people pet your dog when you are out for a walk.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Animals are only being tested in very rare circumstances.
Routine testing of animals is not recommended at this time, and any tests done on animals are done on a case by case basis.
For example, if the pet of a COVID-19 patient has a new, concerning illness with symptoms similar to those of COVID-19, the animals veterinarian might consult with public health and animal health officials to determine if testing is needed.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
There is no reason to think that any animals, including shelter pets, play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
The first case of a wild animal testing positive for the virus in the United States was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
However, this tiger was in a captive zoo environment ,and public health officials believe the tiger became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected and spreading the virus.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal iconexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading.
Some people are worried about getting the disease from these people.
Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, toward people who live in certain parts of the world, people who have traveled internationally, people who were in quarantine, or healthcare professionals.
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
People can fight stigma by providing social support in situations where you notice this is occurring.
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient.
See resources on mental health and coping during COVID-19.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
CDCs COVID-19 case numbers include many publicly reported numbers, including information from state, local, territorial, international and external partners.
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in people and may different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people.
This occurred with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and now with the virus that causes COVID-19.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
All three of these viruses have their origins in bats.
The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initially posted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.
However, the exact source of this virus is unknown.
More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.
The number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The growing number of cases in part reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person.
People are thought to be most contagious when they are symptomatic (the sickest).
That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
More recently the virus has also been detected in asymptomatic persons.
How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made using a test-based or non-test-based strategy (i.e.
time since illness started and time since recovery) in consultation with state and local public health officials.
The decision involves considering the specifics of each situation, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and the results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Learn more about CDCs guidance on when to release someone from isolation and discharge hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
For information on when someone who has been sick with COVID-19 is able to stop home isolation see Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19.
Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease.
Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure.
For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure because the incubation period for this virus is 2 to 14 days.
Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets.
Currently, there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food.
Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds for general food safety.
Throughout the day use a tissue to cover your coughing or sneezing, and wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, like a packaging container, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging.
Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.
Based on information about this novel coronavirus thus far, it seems unlikely that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food – additional investigation is needed.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Generally coronaviruses survive for shorter periods at higher temperatures and higher humidity than in cooler or dryer environments.
However, we dont have direct data for this virus, nor do we have direct data for a temperature-based cutoff for inactivation at this point.
The necessary temperature would also be based on the materials of the surface, the environment, etc.
Regardless of temperature please follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfection.
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the risk assessment may change daily.
The latest updates are available on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) website.
COVID-19 case counts for the United States are updated regularly online.
See the current U.S. case count of COVID-19.
Visit the COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
There is information for people who have had close contact with a person confirmed to have, or being evaluated for, COVID-19 available online.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people must go into public settings (grocery stores, for example).
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
You can learn more about who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 at People who are at higher risk for severe illness.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at Prevention for 2019 Novel Coronavirus and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
More information on Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally presented with mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is much more to be learned about how the disease impacts children.
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a cloth face covering that covers their nose and mouth when they are out in the community.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the face covering without assistance.
Wearing cloth face coverings is a public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning ,and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical face masks and N95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare personnel and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
If appropriate, explain to them that most illness from COVID-19 seems to be mild.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
CDC offers resources to help talk with children about COVID-19.
This is a new virus and we are still learning about it, but so far, there does not seem to be a lot of illness in children.
Most illness, including serious illness, is happening in adults of working age and older adults.
However, children do get the virus and become ill.
Many schools across the country have announced dismissals for temporary periods.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Children with complex, chronic medical conditions, including children with physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional differences, can have special healthcare needs.
Its not known yet whether all of these children are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing cloth face coverings, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on ways to cope with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19:
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Practice everyday preventive actions to help reduce your risk of getting sick and remind everyone in your home to do the same.
These actions are especially important for older adults and people who have severe chronic medical conditions:
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Talk to the school or facility about their emergency operations plan.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
CDC recommends handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or, using alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available.
These actions are part of everyday preventive actions individuals can take to slow the spread of respiratory diseases like COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal iconexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidancepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
See FAQs about hand hygiene for healthcare personnel responding to COVID-2019.
During an outbreak, stay calm and put your preparedness plan to work.
Follow the steps below:
Put your household plan into action.
Depending on the situation, public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19, such as school dismissals.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or and watch for communication from your childs school.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Follow the advice of your local health officials.
Stay home if you can.
Talk to your employer to discuss working from home, taking leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
Employers should be aware that more employees may need to stay at home to care for sick children or other sick family members than is usual in case of a community outbreak.
CDC makes recommendations, shares information, and provides guidance to help slow down the spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. including guidance for schools and businesses.
CDC regularly shares information and provides assistance to state, local, territorial, and tribal health authorities.
These local authorities are responsible for making decisions including  stay at home or shelter in place.
What is included in these orders and how they are implemented are also decided by local authorities.
These decisions may also depend on many factors such as how the virus is spreading in a certain community.
Please contact your local health department to find out more.
CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
Employers, schools, and organizations may decide to visibly screen for symptoms or perform on-site symptom checks.
If your employer, school, or organization requires you to present documentation regarding COVID-19 before returning to work or school (for example, proof of a negative COVID-19 lab test, if a test was performed, contact your healthcare provider to ask if he or she would be able to provide a form of documentation for you.
Documentation of self-isolation and self-quarantine may not be possible.
CDC has guidance for when and how people with COVID-19 can discontinue home isolation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html.
CDC also has guidance for what people should do if they think they have been exposed or feel sick: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Current symptoms reported for patients with COVID-19 have included mild to severe respiratory illness with fever1, cough, and difficulty breathing.
Read about COVID-19 Symptoms.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
For information about testing, see Testing for COVID-19.
The process and locations for testing vary from place to place.
Contact your state, local, tribal, or territorial department for more information, or reach out to a medical provider.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC while medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find someplace to get tested.
See Testing for COVID-19 for more information.
Using the CDC-developed diagnostic test, a negative result means that the virus that causes COVID-19 was not found in the persons sample.
In the early stages of infection, it is possible the virus will not be detected.
For COVID-19, a negative test result for a sample collected while a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID-19 virus is not causing their current illness.
There are actually many tests being used to diagnose COVID-19 that the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
All of these diagnostic tests identify the virus in samples from the respiratory system, such as from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs.
Some tests are conducted at the testing site you visit, and results are available to you within minutes.
Other tests must be sent to a laboratory to analyze, a process that takes 1-2 days once the lab receives your samples.
Locations and types of testing sites vary depending on where you live (see question: Where can I get tested).
Check with your testing site to learn which test it uses.
You can find a patient information sheet about each test on the FDA websiteexternal icon.
In the coming weeks, healthcare providers in most states will begin offering home collection kits, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
A healthcare provider will need to give you the approved kit – the Pixel by LabCorp COVID-19 test home collection kit.
You will be able to collect your sample (a nasal swab) at home and then send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
For more information please see FDAs most recent press releaseexternal icon.
Serology testing checks a sample of a persons blood to look for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
These antibodies are produced when someone has been infected, so a positive result from this test indicates that person was previously infected with the virus.
CDC is working with other federal agencies to evaluate the performance of commercially manufactured serology tests that are becoming increasingly available from healthcare providers.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
We do not know yet if the antibodies that result from infection with SARS-CoV-2 can protect someone from reinfection with this virus or how long antibodies to the virus will protect someone.
Scientists are conducting research to answer those questions.
Serology tests may not be able to tell you if you are currently infected because it typically takes 1 to 2 weeks to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
To tell if you are currently infected, you would need a test that identifies the virus in samples from your upper respiratory system, such as a nasopharyngeal swab.
CDC and partners are investigating to determine if you can get sick with COVID-19 more than once.
At this time, we are not sure if you can become re-infected.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
If you are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, you should:
If there is an outbreak in your community, stay home as much as possible.
Watch for symptoms and emergency signs.
If you get sick, stay home and call your doctor.
More information on how to prepare, what to do if you get sick, and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on People at Risk for Serious Illness from COVID-19.
As CDC gets more information about COVID-19 cases here in the United States, we will update this list as needed.
Currently, there is no evidence to show that taking ibuprofen or naproxen can lead to a more severe infection of COVID-19.
People with high blood pressure should take their blood pressure medications, as directed, and work with their healthcare provider to make sure that their blood pressure is as well controlled as possible.
Any changes to your medications should only be made by your healthcare provider.
Based on available information, adults aged 65 years and older and people of any age with underlying medical conditions included on this list are at higher risk for severe illness and poorer outcomes from COVID-19.
CDC is collecting and analyzing data regularly and will update the list when we learn more.
People with underlying medical conditions not on the list might also be at higher risk and should consult with their healthcare provider if they are concerned.
We encourage all people, regardless of risk, to:
Generally, well-controlled means that your condition is stable, not life-threatening, and laboratory assessments and other findings are as similar as possible to those without the health condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Severity typically means how much impact the illness or condition has on your bodys function.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control, including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigation, see Information for Healthcare Professionals.
For information on specimen collection and shipment, see Information for Laboratories.
For information for public health professional on COVID-19, see Information for Public Health Professionals.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread from close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) with a person who is currently sick with COVID-19.
The virus likely spreads primarily through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, similar to how influenza and other respiratory infections spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N-95 respirator).
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
After removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
A funeral or visitation service can be held for a person who has died of COVID-19.
Funeral home workers should follow their routine infection prevention and control precautions when handling a decedent who died of COVID-19.
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
For transporting a body after the body has been bagged, disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Embalming can be conducted.
During embalming, follow Standard Precautions including the use of additional PPE if splashing is expected (e.g.
disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N95 respirator).
Wear appropriate respiratory protection if any procedures will generate aerosols or if required for chemicals used in accordance with the manufacturers label.
Wear heavy-duty gloves over nitrile disposable gloves if there is a risk of cuts, puncture wounds, or other injuries that break the skin.
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
After cleaning and removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water is not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
Decedents with COVID-19 can be buried or cremated, but check for any additional state and local requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the remains of individuals who have died of certain infectious diseases.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
CDC is working with other federal partners in a whole-of-government response.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes available.
CDC works 24/7 to protect peoples health.
More information about CDCs response to COVID-19 is available online.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
A small number of pets have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after contact with people with COVID-19.
Pets have other types of coronaviruses that can make them sick, like canine and feline coronaviruses.
These other coronaviruses cannot infect people and are not related to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
No.
At this time, routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Until we learn more about this new coronavirus, you should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would with people.
When possible, have another member of your household care for your animals while you are sick.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a cloth face covering.
We dont know for sure which animals can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
A tiger at a zoo in New York has also tested positive for the virus.
Recent research shows that ferrets, cats, and golden Syrian hamsters can be experimentally infected with the virus and can spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Pigs, chickens, and ducks did not become infected or spread the infection based on results from these studies.
Data from one study suggested dogs are not as likely to become infected with the virus as cats and ferrets.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus that causes COVID-19 and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus and how it spreads, but it appears it can spread from humans to animals in some situations.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Most of these animals had contact with a person with COVID-19.
A tiger at a New York zoo has also tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person, typically through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
People sick with COVID-19 should isolate themselves from other people and animals, including pets, during their illness until we know more about how this virus affects animals.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a cloth face covering and wash your hands before and after you interact with pets.
Walking a dog is important for both animal and human health and well-being.
Walk dogs on a leash, maintaining at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other people and animals, do not gather in groups, and stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings.
Do not go to dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather.
To help maintain social distancing, do not let other people pet your dog when you are out for a walk.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Animals are only being tested in very rare circumstances.
Routine testing of animals is not recommended at this time, and any tests done on animals are done on a case by case basis.
For example, if the pet of a COVID-19 patient has a new, concerning illness with symptoms similar to those of COVID-19, the animals veterinarian might consult with public health and animal health officials to determine if testing is needed.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
There is no reason to think that any animals, including shelter pets, play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
The first case of a wild animal testing positive for the virus in the United States was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
However, this tiger was in a captive zoo environment ,and public health officials believe the tiger became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected and spreading the virus.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal iconexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading.
Some people are worried about getting the disease from these people.
Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, toward people who live in certain parts of the world, people who have traveled internationally, people who were in quarantine, or healthcare professionals.
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
People can fight stigma by providing social support in situations where you notice this is occurring.
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient.
See resources on mental health and coping during COVID-19.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
CDCs COVID-19 case numbers include many publicly reported numbers, including information from state, local, territorial, international and external partners.
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in people and may different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people.
This occurred with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and now with the virus that causes COVID-19.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
All three of these viruses have their origins in bats.
The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initially posted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.
However, the exact source of this virus is unknown.
More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.
The number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The growing number of cases in part reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person.
People are thought to be most contagious when they are symptomatic (the sickest).
That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
More recently the virus has also been detected in asymptomatic persons.
How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made using a test-based or non-test-based strategy (i.e.
time since illness started and time since recovery) in consultation with state and local public health officials.
The decision involves considering the specifics of each situation, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and the results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Learn more about CDCs guidance on when to release someone from isolation and discharge hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
For information on when someone who has been sick with COVID-19 is able to stop home isolation see Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19.
Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease.
Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure.
For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure because the incubation period for this virus is 2 to 14 days.
Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets.
Currently, there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food.
Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds for general food safety.
Throughout the day use a tissue to cover your coughing or sneezing, and wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, like a packaging container, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging.
Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.
Based on information about this novel coronavirus thus far, it seems unlikely that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food – additional investigation is needed.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Generally coronaviruses survive for shorter periods at higher temperatures and higher humidity than in cooler or dryer environments.
However, we dont have direct data for this virus, nor do we have direct data for a temperature-based cutoff for inactivation at this point.
The necessary temperature would also be based on the materials of the surface, the environment, etc.
Regardless of temperature please follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfection.
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the risk assessment may change daily.
The latest updates are available on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) website.
COVID-19 case counts for the United States are updated regularly online.
See the current U.S. case count of COVID-19.
Visit the COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
There is information for people who have had close contact with a person confirmed to have, or being evaluated for, COVID-19 available online.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people must go into public settings (grocery stores, for example).
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
You can learn more about who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 at People who are at higher risk for severe illness.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at Prevention for 2019 Novel Coronavirus and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
More information on Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally presented with mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is much more to be learned about how the disease impacts children.
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a cloth face covering that covers their nose and mouth when they are out in the community.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the face covering without assistance.
Wearing cloth face coverings is a public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning ,and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical face masks and N95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare personnel and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
If appropriate, explain to them that most illness from COVID-19 seems to be mild.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
CDC offers resources to help talk with children about COVID-19.
This is a new virus and we are still learning about it, but so far, there does not seem to be a lot of illness in children.
Most illness, including serious illness, is happening in adults of working age and older adults.
However, children do get the virus and become ill.
Many schools across the country have announced dismissals for temporary periods.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Children with complex, chronic medical conditions, including children with physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional differences, can have special healthcare needs.
Its not known yet whether all of these children are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing cloth face coverings, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on ways to cope with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19:
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Practice everyday preventive actions to help reduce your risk of getting sick and remind everyone in your home to do the same.
These actions are especially important for older adults and people who have severe chronic medical conditions:
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Talk to the school or facility about their emergency operations plan.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
CDC recommends handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or, using alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available.
These actions are part of everyday preventive actions individuals can take to slow the spread of respiratory diseases like COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal iconexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidancepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
See FAQs about hand hygiene for healthcare personnel responding to COVID-2019.
During an outbreak, stay calm and put your preparedness plan to work.
Follow the steps below:
Put your household plan into action.
Depending on the situation, public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19, such as school dismissals.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or and watch for communication from your childs school.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Follow the advice of your local health officials.
Stay home if you can.
Talk to your employer to discuss working from home, taking leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
Employers should be aware that more employees may need to stay at home to care for sick children or other sick family members than is usual in case of a community outbreak.
CDC makes recommendations, shares information, and provides guidance to help slow down the spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. including guidance for schools and businesses.
CDC regularly shares information and provides assistance to state, local, territorial, and tribal health authorities.
These local authorities are responsible for making decisions including  stay at home or shelter in place.
What is included in these orders and how they are implemented are also decided by local authorities.
These decisions may also depend on many factors such as how the virus is spreading in a certain community.
Please contact your local health department to find out more.
CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
Employers, schools, and organizations may decide to visibly screen for symptoms or perform on-site symptom checks.
If your employer, school, or organization requires you to present documentation regarding COVID-19 before returning to work or school (for example, proof of a negative COVID-19 lab test, if a test was performed, contact your healthcare provider to ask if he or she would be able to provide a form of documentation for you.
Documentation of self-isolation and self-quarantine may not be possible.
CDC has guidance for when and how people with COVID-19 can discontinue home isolation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html.
CDC also has guidance for what people should do if they think they have been exposed or feel sick: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Current symptoms reported for patients with COVID-19 have included mild to severe respiratory illness with fever1, cough, and difficulty breathing.
Read about COVID-19 Symptoms.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
For information about testing, see Testing for COVID-19.
The process and locations for testing vary from place to place.
Contact your state, local, tribal, or territorial department for more information, or reach out to a medical provider.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC while medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find someplace to get tested.
See Testing for COVID-19 for more information.
Using the CDC-developed diagnostic test, a negative result means that the virus that causes COVID-19 was not found in the persons sample.
In the early stages of infection, it is possible the virus will not be detected.
For COVID-19, a negative test result for a sample collected while a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID-19 virus is not causing their current illness.
There are actually many tests being used to diagnose COVID-19 that the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
All of these diagnostic tests identify the virus in samples from the respiratory system, such as from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs.
Some tests are conducted at the testing site you visit, and results are available to you within minutes.
Other tests must be sent to a laboratory to analyze, a process that takes 1-2 days once the lab receives your samples.
Locations and types of testing sites vary depending on where you live (see question: Where can I get tested).
Check with your testing site to learn which test it uses.
You can find a patient information sheet about each test on the FDA websiteexternal icon.
In the coming weeks, healthcare providers in most states will begin offering home collection kits, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
A healthcare provider will need to give you the approved kit – the Pixel by LabCorp COVID-19 test home collection kit.
You will be able to collect your sample (a nasal swab) at home and then send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
For more information please see FDAs most recent press releaseexternal icon.
Serology testing checks a sample of a persons blood to look for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
These antibodies are produced when someone has been infected, so a positive result from this test indicates that person was previously infected with the virus.
CDC is working with other federal agencies to evaluate the performance of commercially manufactured serology tests that are becoming increasingly available from healthcare providers.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
We do not know yet if the antibodies that result from infection with SARS-CoV-2 can protect someone from reinfection with this virus or how long antibodies to the virus will protect someone.
Scientists are conducting research to answer those questions.
Serology tests may not be able to tell you if you are currently infected because it typically takes 1 to 2 weeks to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
To tell if you are currently infected, you would need a test that identifies the virus in samples from your upper respiratory system, such as a nasopharyngeal swab.
CDC and partners are investigating to determine if you can get sick with COVID-19 more than once.
At this time, we are not sure if you can become re-infected.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
If you are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, you should:
If there is an outbreak in your community, stay home as much as possible.
Watch for symptoms and emergency signs.
If you get sick, stay home and call your doctor.
More information on how to prepare, what to do if you get sick, and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on People at Risk for Serious Illness from COVID-19.
As CDC gets more information about COVID-19 cases here in the United States, we will update this list as needed.
Currently, there is no evidence to show that taking ibuprofen or naproxen can lead to a more severe infection of COVID-19.
People with high blood pressure should take their blood pressure medications, as directed, and work with their healthcare provider to make sure that their blood pressure is as well controlled as possible.
Any changes to your medications should only be made by your healthcare provider.
Based on available information, adults aged 65 years and older and people of any age with underlying medical conditions included on this list are at higher risk for severe illness and poorer outcomes from COVID-19.
CDC is collecting and analyzing data regularly and will update the list when we learn more.
People with underlying medical conditions not on the list might also be at higher risk and should consult with their healthcare provider if they are concerned.
We encourage all people, regardless of risk, to:
Generally, well-controlled means that your condition is stable, not life-threatening, and laboratory assessments and other findings are as similar as possible to those without the health condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Severity typically means how much impact the illness or condition has on your bodys function.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control, including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigation, see Information for Healthcare Professionals.
For information on specimen collection and shipment, see Information for Laboratories.
For information for public health professional on COVID-19, see Information for Public Health Professionals.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread from close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) with a person who is currently sick with COVID-19.
The virus likely spreads primarily through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, similar to how influenza and other respiratory infections spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N-95 respirator).
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
After removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
A funeral or visitation service can be held for a person who has died of COVID-19.
Funeral home workers should follow their routine infection prevention and control precautions when handling a decedent who died of COVID-19.
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
For transporting a body after the body has been bagged, disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Embalming can be conducted.
During embalming, follow Standard Precautions including the use of additional PPE if splashing is expected (e.g.
disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N95 respirator).
Wear appropriate respiratory protection if any procedures will generate aerosols or if required for chemicals used in accordance with the manufacturers label.
Wear heavy-duty gloves over nitrile disposable gloves if there is a risk of cuts, puncture wounds, or other injuries that break the skin.
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
After cleaning and removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water is not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
Decedents with COVID-19 can be buried or cremated, but check for any additional state and local requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the remains of individuals who have died of certain infectious diseases.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
CDC is working with other federal partners in a whole-of-government response.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes available.
CDC works 24/7 to protect peoples health.
More information about CDCs response to COVID-19 is available online.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
A small number of pets have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after contact with people with COVID-19.
Pets have other types of coronaviruses that can make them sick, like canine and feline coronaviruses.
These other coronaviruses cannot infect people and are not related to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
No.
At this time, routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Until we learn more about this new coronavirus, you should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would with people.
When possible, have another member of your household care for your animals while you are sick.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a cloth face covering.
We dont know for sure which animals can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
A tiger at a zoo in New York has also tested positive for the virus.
Recent research shows that ferrets, cats, and golden Syrian hamsters can be experimentally infected with the virus and can spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Pigs, chickens, and ducks did not become infected or spread the infection based on results from these studies.
Data from one study suggested dogs are not as likely to become infected with the virus as cats and ferrets.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus that causes COVID-19 and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus and how it spreads, but it appears it can spread from humans to animals in some situations.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Most of these animals had contact with a person with COVID-19.
A tiger at a New York zoo has also tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person, typically through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
People sick with COVID-19 should isolate themselves from other people and animals, including pets, during their illness until we know more about how this virus affects animals.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a cloth face covering and wash your hands before and after you interact with pets.
Walking a dog is important for both animal and human health and well-being.
Walk dogs on a leash, maintaining at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other people and animals, do not gather in groups, and stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings.
Do not go to dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather.
To help maintain social distancing, do not let other people pet your dog when you are out for a walk.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Animals are only being tested in very rare circumstances.
Routine testing of animals is not recommended at this time, and any tests done on animals are done on a case by case basis.
For example, if the pet of a COVID-19 patient has a new, concerning illness with symptoms similar to those of COVID-19, the animals veterinarian might consult with public health and animal health officials to determine if testing is needed.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
There is no reason to think that any animals, including shelter pets, play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
The first case of a wild animal testing positive for the virus in the United States was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
However, this tiger was in a captive zoo environment ,and public health officials believe the tiger became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected and spreading the virus.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal iconexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading.
Some people are worried about getting the disease from these people.
Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, toward people who live in certain parts of the world, people who have traveled internationally, people who were in quarantine, or healthcare professionals.
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
People can fight stigma by providing social support in situations where you notice this is occurring.
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient.
See resources on mental health and coping during COVID-19.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
CDCs COVID-19 case numbers include many publicly reported numbers, including information from state, local, territorial, international and external partners.
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in people and may different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people.
This occurred with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and now with the virus that causes COVID-19.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
All three of these viruses have their origins in bats.
The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initially posted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.
However, the exact source of this virus is unknown.
More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.
The number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The growing number of cases in part reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person.
People are thought to be most contagious when they are symptomatic (the sickest).
That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
More recently the virus has also been detected in asymptomatic persons.
How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made using a test-based or non-test-based strategy (i.e.
time since illness started and time since recovery) in consultation with state and local public health officials.
The decision involves considering the specifics of each situation, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and the results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Learn more about CDCs guidance on when to release someone from isolation and discharge hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
For information on when someone who has been sick with COVID-19 is able to stop home isolation see Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19.
Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease.
Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure.
For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure because the incubation period for this virus is 2 to 14 days.
Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets.
Currently, there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food.
Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds for general food safety.
Throughout the day use a tissue to cover your coughing or sneezing, and wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, like a packaging container, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging.
Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.
Based on information about this novel coronavirus thus far, it seems unlikely that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food – additional investigation is needed.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Generally coronaviruses survive for shorter periods at higher temperatures and higher humidity than in cooler or dryer environments.
However, we dont have direct data for this virus, nor do we have direct data for a temperature-based cutoff for inactivation at this point.
The necessary temperature would also be based on the materials of the surface, the environment, etc.
Regardless of temperature please follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfection.
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the risk assessment may change daily.
The latest updates are available on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) website.
COVID-19 case counts for the United States are updated regularly online.
See the current U.S. case count of COVID-19.
Visit the COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
There is information for people who have had close contact with a person confirmed to have, or being evaluated for, COVID-19 available online.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people must go into public settings (grocery stores, for example).
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
You can learn more about who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 at People who are at higher risk for severe illness.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at Prevention for 2019 Novel Coronavirus and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
More information on Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally presented with mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is much more to be learned about how the disease impacts children.
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a cloth face covering that covers their nose and mouth when they are out in the community.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the face covering without assistance.
Wearing cloth face coverings is a public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning ,and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical face masks and N95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare personnel and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
If appropriate, explain to them that most illness from COVID-19 seems to be mild.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
CDC offers resources to help talk with children about COVID-19.
This is a new virus and we are still learning about it, but so far, there does not seem to be a lot of illness in children.
Most illness, including serious illness, is happening in adults of working age and older adults.
However, children do get the virus and become ill.
Many schools across the country have announced dismissals for temporary periods.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Children with complex, chronic medical conditions, including children with physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional differences, can have special healthcare needs.
Its not known yet whether all of these children are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing cloth face coverings, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on ways to cope with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19:
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Practice everyday preventive actions to help reduce your risk of getting sick and remind everyone in your home to do the same.
These actions are especially important for older adults and people who have severe chronic medical conditions:
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Talk to the school or facility about their emergency operations plan.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
CDC recommends handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or, using alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available.
These actions are part of everyday preventive actions individuals can take to slow the spread of respiratory diseases like COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal iconexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidancepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
See FAQs about hand hygiene for healthcare personnel responding to COVID-2019.
During an outbreak, stay calm and put your preparedness plan to work.
Follow the steps below:
Put your household plan into action.
Depending on the situation, public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19, such as school dismissals.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or and watch for communication from your childs school.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Follow the advice of your local health officials.
Stay home if you can.
Talk to your employer to discuss working from home, taking leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
Employers should be aware that more employees may need to stay at home to care for sick children or other sick family members than is usual in case of a community outbreak.
CDC makes recommendations, shares information, and provides guidance to help slow down the spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. including guidance for schools and businesses.
CDC regularly shares information and provides assistance to state, local, territorial, and tribal health authorities.
These local authorities are responsible for making decisions including  stay at home or shelter in place.
What is included in these orders and how they are implemented are also decided by local authorities.
These decisions may also depend on many factors such as how the virus is spreading in a certain community.
Please contact your local health department to find out more.
CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
Employers, schools, and organizations may decide to visibly screen for symptoms or perform on-site symptom checks.
If your employer, school, or organization requires you to present documentation regarding COVID-19 before returning to work or school (for example, proof of a negative COVID-19 lab test, if a test was performed, contact your healthcare provider to ask if he or she would be able to provide a form of documentation for you.
Documentation of self-isolation and self-quarantine may not be possible.
CDC has guidance for when and how people with COVID-19 can discontinue home isolation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html.
CDC also has guidance for what people should do if they think they have been exposed or feel sick: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Current symptoms reported for patients with COVID-19 have included mild to severe respiratory illness with fever1, cough, and difficulty breathing.
Read about COVID-19 Symptoms.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
For information about testing, see Testing for COVID-19.
The process and locations for testing vary from place to place.
Contact your state, local, tribal, or territorial department for more information, or reach out to a medical provider.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC while medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find someplace to get tested.
See Testing for COVID-19 for more information.
Using the CDC-developed diagnostic test, a negative result means that the virus that causes COVID-19 was not found in the persons sample.
In the early stages of infection, it is possible the virus will not be detected.
For COVID-19, a negative test result for a sample collected while a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID-19 virus is not causing their current illness.
There are actually many tests being used to diagnose COVID-19 that the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
All of these diagnostic tests identify the virus in samples from the respiratory system, such as from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs.
Some tests are conducted at the testing site you visit, and results are available to you within minutes.
Other tests must be sent to a laboratory to analyze, a process that takes 1-2 days once the lab receives your samples.
Locations and types of testing sites vary depending on where you live (see question: Where can I get tested).
Check with your testing site to learn which test it uses.
You can find a patient information sheet about each test on the FDA websiteexternal icon.
In the coming weeks, healthcare providers in most states will begin offering home collection kits, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
A healthcare provider will need to give you the approved kit – the Pixel by LabCorp COVID-19 test home collection kit.
You will be able to collect your sample (a nasal swab) at home and then send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
For more information please see FDAs most recent press releaseexternal icon.
Serology testing checks a sample of a persons blood to look for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
These antibodies are produced when someone has been infected, so a positive result from this test indicates that person was previously infected with the virus.
CDC is working with other federal agencies to evaluate the performance of commercially manufactured serology tests that are becoming increasingly available from healthcare providers.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
We do not know yet if the antibodies that result from infection with SARS-CoV-2 can protect someone from reinfection with this virus or how long antibodies to the virus will protect someone.
Scientists are conducting research to answer those questions.
Serology tests may not be able to tell you if you are currently infected because it typically takes 1 to 2 weeks to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
To tell if you are currently infected, you would need a test that identifies the virus in samples from your upper respiratory system, such as a nasopharyngeal swab.
CDC and partners are investigating to determine if you can get sick with COVID-19 more than once.
At this time, we are not sure if you can become re-infected.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
If you are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, you should:
If there is an outbreak in your community, stay home as much as possible.
Watch for symptoms and emergency signs.
If you get sick, stay home and call your doctor.
More information on how to prepare, what to do if you get sick, and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on People at Risk for Serious Illness from COVID-19.
As CDC gets more information about COVID-19 cases here in the United States, we will update this list as needed.
Currently, there is no evidence to show that taking ibuprofen or naproxen can lead to a more severe infection of COVID-19.
People with high blood pressure should take their blood pressure medications, as directed, and work with their healthcare provider to make sure that their blood pressure is as well controlled as possible.
Any changes to your medications should only be made by your healthcare provider.
Based on available information, adults aged 65 years and older and people of any age with underlying medical conditions included on this list are at higher risk for severe illness and poorer outcomes from COVID-19.
CDC is collecting and analyzing data regularly and will update the list when we learn more.
People with underlying medical conditions not on the list might also be at higher risk and should consult with their healthcare provider if they are concerned.
We encourage all people, regardless of risk, to:
Generally, well-controlled means that your condition is stable, not life-threatening, and laboratory assessments and other findings are as similar as possible to those without the health condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Severity typically means how much impact the illness or condition has on your bodys function.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control, including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigation, see Information for Healthcare Professionals.
For information on specimen collection and shipment, see Information for Laboratories.
For information for public health professional on COVID-19, see Information for Public Health Professionals.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread from close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) with a person who is currently sick with COVID-19.
The virus likely spreads primarily through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, similar to how influenza and other respiratory infections spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N-95 respirator).
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
After removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
A funeral or visitation service can be held for a person who has died of COVID-19.
Funeral home workers should follow their routine infection prevention and control precautions when handling a decedent who died of COVID-19.
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
For transporting a body after the body has been bagged, disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Embalming can be conducted.
During embalming, follow Standard Precautions including the use of additional PPE if splashing is expected (e.g.
disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N95 respirator).
Wear appropriate respiratory protection if any procedures will generate aerosols or if required for chemicals used in accordance with the manufacturers label.
Wear heavy-duty gloves over nitrile disposable gloves if there is a risk of cuts, puncture wounds, or other injuries that break the skin.
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
After cleaning and removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water is not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
Decedents with COVID-19 can be buried or cremated, but check for any additional state and local requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the remains of individuals who have died of certain infectious diseases.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
CDC is working with other federal partners in a whole-of-government response.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes available.
CDC works 24/7 to protect peoples health.
More information about CDCs response to COVID-19 is available online.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
A small number of pets have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after contact with people with COVID-19.
Pets have other types of coronaviruses that can make them sick, like canine and feline coronaviruses.
These other coronaviruses cannot infect people and are not related to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
No.
At this time, routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Until we learn more about this new coronavirus, you should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would with people.
When possible, have another member of your household care for your animals while you are sick.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a cloth face covering.
We dont know for sure which animals can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
A tiger at a zoo in New York has also tested positive for the virus.
Recent research shows that ferrets, cats, and golden Syrian hamsters can be experimentally infected with the virus and can spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Pigs, chickens, and ducks did not become infected or spread the infection based on results from these studies.
Data from one study suggested dogs are not as likely to become infected with the virus as cats and ferrets.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus that causes COVID-19 and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus and how it spreads, but it appears it can spread from humans to animals in some situations.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Most of these animals had contact with a person with COVID-19.
A tiger at a New York zoo has also tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person, typically through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
People sick with COVID-19 should isolate themselves from other people and animals, including pets, during their illness until we know more about how this virus affects animals.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a cloth face covering and wash your hands before and after you interact with pets.
Walking a dog is important for both animal and human health and well-being.
Walk dogs on a leash, maintaining at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other people and animals, do not gather in groups, and stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings.
Do not go to dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather.
To help maintain social distancing, do not let other people pet your dog when you are out for a walk.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Animals are only being tested in very rare circumstances.
Routine testing of animals is not recommended at this time, and any tests done on animals are done on a case by case basis.
For example, if the pet of a COVID-19 patient has a new, concerning illness with symptoms similar to those of COVID-19, the animals veterinarian might consult with public health and animal health officials to determine if testing is needed.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
There is no reason to think that any animals, including shelter pets, play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
The first case of a wild animal testing positive for the virus in the United States was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
However, this tiger was in a captive zoo environment ,and public health officials believe the tiger became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected and spreading the virus.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal iconexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading.
Some people are worried about getting the disease from these people.
Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, toward people who live in certain parts of the world, people who have traveled internationally, people who were in quarantine, or healthcare professionals.
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
People can fight stigma by providing social support in situations where you notice this is occurring.
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient.
See resources on mental health and coping during COVID-19.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
CDCs COVID-19 case numbers include many publicly reported numbers, including information from state, local, territorial, international and external partners.
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in people and may different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people.
This occurred with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and now with the virus that causes COVID-19.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
All three of these viruses have their origins in bats.
The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initially posted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.
However, the exact source of this virus is unknown.
More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.
The number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The growing number of cases in part reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person.
People are thought to be most contagious when they are symptomatic (the sickest).
That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
More recently the virus has also been detected in asymptomatic persons.
How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made using a test-based or non-test-based strategy (i.e.
time since illness started and time since recovery) in consultation with state and local public health officials.
The decision involves considering the specifics of each situation, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and the results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Learn more about CDCs guidance on when to release someone from isolation and discharge hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
For information on when someone who has been sick with COVID-19 is able to stop home isolation see Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19.
Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease.
Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure.
For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure because the incubation period for this virus is 2 to 14 days.
Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets.
Currently, there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food.
Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds for general food safety.
Throughout the day use a tissue to cover your coughing or sneezing, and wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, like a packaging container, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging.
Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.
Based on information about this novel coronavirus thus far, it seems unlikely that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food – additional investigation is needed.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Generally coronaviruses survive for shorter periods at higher temperatures and higher humidity than in cooler or dryer environments.
However, we dont have direct data for this virus, nor do we have direct data for a temperature-based cutoff for inactivation at this point.
The necessary temperature would also be based on the materials of the surface, the environment, etc.
Regardless of temperature please follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfection.
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the risk assessment may change daily.
The latest updates are available on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) website.
COVID-19 case counts for the United States are updated regularly online.
See the current U.S. case count of COVID-19.
Visit the COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
There is information for people who have had close contact with a person confirmed to have, or being evaluated for, COVID-19 available online.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people must go into public settings (grocery stores, for example).
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
You can learn more about who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 at People who are at higher risk for severe illness.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at Prevention for 2019 Novel Coronavirus and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
More information on Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally presented with mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is much more to be learned about how the disease impacts children.
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a cloth face covering that covers their nose and mouth when they are out in the community.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the face covering without assistance.
Wearing cloth face coverings is a public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning ,and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical face masks and N95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare personnel and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
If appropriate, explain to them that most illness from COVID-19 seems to be mild.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
CDC offers resources to help talk with children about COVID-19.
This is a new virus and we are still learning about it, but so far, there does not seem to be a lot of illness in children.
Most illness, including serious illness, is happening in adults of working age and older adults.
However, children do get the virus and become ill.
Many schools across the country have announced dismissals for temporary periods.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Children with complex, chronic medical conditions, including children with physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional differences, can have special healthcare needs.
Its not known yet whether all of these children are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing cloth face coverings, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on ways to cope with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19:
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Practice everyday preventive actions to help reduce your risk of getting sick and remind everyone in your home to do the same.
These actions are especially important for older adults and people who have severe chronic medical conditions:
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Talk to the school or facility about their emergency operations plan.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
CDC recommends handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or, using alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available.
These actions are part of everyday preventive actions individuals can take to slow the spread of respiratory diseases like COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal iconexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidancepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
See FAQs about hand hygiene for healthcare personnel responding to COVID-2019.
During an outbreak, stay calm and put your preparedness plan to work.
Follow the steps below:
Put your household plan into action.
Depending on the situation, public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19, such as school dismissals.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or and watch for communication from your childs school.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Follow the advice of your local health officials.
Stay home if you can.
Talk to your employer to discuss working from home, taking leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
Employers should be aware that more employees may need to stay at home to care for sick children or other sick family members than is usual in case of a community outbreak.
CDC makes recommendations, shares information, and provides guidance to help slow down the spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. including guidance for schools and businesses.
CDC regularly shares information and provides assistance to state, local, territorial, and tribal health authorities.
These local authorities are responsible for making decisions including  stay at home or shelter in place.
What is included in these orders and how they are implemented are also decided by local authorities.
These decisions may also depend on many factors such as how the virus is spreading in a certain community.
Please contact your local health department to find out more.
CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
Employers, schools, and organizations may decide to visibly screen for symptoms or perform on-site symptom checks.
If your employer, school, or organization requires you to present documentation regarding COVID-19 before returning to work or school (for example, proof of a negative COVID-19 lab test, if a test was performed, contact your healthcare provider to ask if he or she would be able to provide a form of documentation for you.
Documentation of self-isolation and self-quarantine may not be possible.
CDC has guidance for when and how people with COVID-19 can discontinue home isolation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html.
CDC also has guidance for what people should do if they think they have been exposed or feel sick: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Current symptoms reported for patients with COVID-19 have included mild to severe respiratory illness with fever1, cough, and difficulty breathing.
Read about COVID-19 Symptoms.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
For information about testing, see Testing for COVID-19.
The process and locations for testing vary from place to place.
Contact your state, local, tribal, or territorial department for more information, or reach out to a medical provider.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC while medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find someplace to get tested.
See Testing for COVID-19 for more information.
Using the CDC-developed diagnostic test, a negative result means that the virus that causes COVID-19 was not found in the persons sample.
In the early stages of infection, it is possible the virus will not be detected.
For COVID-19, a negative test result for a sample collected while a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID-19 virus is not causing their current illness.
There are actually many tests being used to diagnose COVID-19 that the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
All of these diagnostic tests identify the virus in samples from the respiratory system, such as from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs.
Some tests are conducted at the testing site you visit, and results are available to you within minutes.
Other tests must be sent to a laboratory to analyze, a process that takes 1-2 days once the lab receives your samples.
Locations and types of testing sites vary depending on where you live (see question: Where can I get tested).
Check with your testing site to learn which test it uses.
You can find a patient information sheet about each test on the FDA websiteexternal icon.
In the coming weeks, healthcare providers in most states will begin offering home collection kits, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
A healthcare provider will need to give you the approved kit – the Pixel by LabCorp COVID-19 test home collection kit.
You will be able to collect your sample (a nasal swab) at home and then send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
For more information please see FDAs most recent press releaseexternal icon.
Serology testing checks a sample of a persons blood to look for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
These antibodies are produced when someone has been infected, so a positive result from this test indicates that person was previously infected with the virus.
CDC is working with other federal agencies to evaluate the performance of commercially manufactured serology tests that are becoming increasingly available from healthcare providers.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
We do not know yet if the antibodies that result from infection with SARS-CoV-2 can protect someone from reinfection with this virus or how long antibodies to the virus will protect someone.
Scientists are conducting research to answer those questions.
Serology tests may not be able to tell you if you are currently infected because it typically takes 1 to 2 weeks to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
To tell if you are currently infected, you would need a test that identifies the virus in samples from your upper respiratory system, such as a nasopharyngeal swab.
CDC and partners are investigating to determine if you can get sick with COVID-19 more than once.
At this time, we are not sure if you can become re-infected.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
If you are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, you should:
If there is an outbreak in your community, stay home as much as possible.
Watch for symptoms and emergency signs.
If you get sick, stay home and call your doctor.
More information on how to prepare, what to do if you get sick, and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on People at Risk for Serious Illness from COVID-19.
As CDC gets more information about COVID-19 cases here in the United States, we will update this list as needed.
Currently, there is no evidence to show that taking ibuprofen or naproxen can lead to a more severe infection of COVID-19.
People with high blood pressure should take their blood pressure medications, as directed, and work with their healthcare provider to make sure that their blood pressure is as well controlled as possible.
Any changes to your medications should only be made by your healthcare provider.
Based on available information, adults aged 65 years and older and people of any age with underlying medical conditions included on this list are at higher risk for severe illness and poorer outcomes from COVID-19.
CDC is collecting and analyzing data regularly and will update the list when we learn more.
People with underlying medical conditions not on the list might also be at higher risk and should consult with their healthcare provider if they are concerned.
We encourage all people, regardless of risk, to:
Generally, well-controlled means that your condition is stable, not life-threatening, and laboratory assessments and other findings are as similar as possible to those without the health condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Severity typically means how much impact the illness or condition has on your bodys function.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control, including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigation, see Information for Healthcare Professionals.
For information on specimen collection and shipment, see Information for Laboratories.
For information for public health professional on COVID-19, see Information for Public Health Professionals.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread from close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) with a person who is currently sick with COVID-19.
The virus likely spreads primarily through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, similar to how influenza and other respiratory infections spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N-95 respirator).
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
After removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
A funeral or visitation service can be held for a person who has died of COVID-19.
Funeral home workers should follow their routine infection prevention and control precautions when handling a decedent who died of COVID-19.
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
For transporting a body after the body has been bagged, disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Embalming can be conducted.
During embalming, follow Standard Precautions including the use of additional PPE if splashing is expected (e.g.
disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N95 respirator).
Wear appropriate respiratory protection if any procedures will generate aerosols or if required for chemicals used in accordance with the manufacturers label.
Wear heavy-duty gloves over nitrile disposable gloves if there is a risk of cuts, puncture wounds, or other injuries that break the skin.
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
After cleaning and removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water is not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
Decedents with COVID-19 can be buried or cremated, but check for any additional state and local requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the remains of individuals who have died of certain infectious diseases.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
CDC is working with other federal partners in a whole-of-government response.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes available.
CDC works 24/7 to protect peoples health.
More information about CDCs response to COVID-19 is available online.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
A small number of pets have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after contact with people with COVID-19.
Pets have other types of coronaviruses that can make them sick, like canine and feline coronaviruses.
These other coronaviruses cannot infect people and are not related to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
No.
At this time, routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Until we learn more about this new coronavirus, you should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would with people.
When possible, have another member of your household care for your animals while you are sick.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a cloth face covering.
We dont know for sure which animals can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
A tiger at a zoo in New York has also tested positive for the virus.
Recent research shows that ferrets, cats, and golden Syrian hamsters can be experimentally infected with the virus and can spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Pigs, chickens, and ducks did not become infected or spread the infection based on results from these studies.
Data from one study suggested dogs are not as likely to become infected with the virus as cats and ferrets.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus that causes COVID-19 and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus and how it spreads, but it appears it can spread from humans to animals in some situations.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Most of these animals had contact with a person with COVID-19.
A tiger at a New York zoo has also tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person, typically through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
People sick with COVID-19 should isolate themselves from other people and animals, including pets, during their illness until we know more about how this virus affects animals.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a cloth face covering and wash your hands before and after you interact with pets.
Walking a dog is important for both animal and human health and well-being.
Walk dogs on a leash, maintaining at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other people and animals, do not gather in groups, and stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings.
Do not go to dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather.
To help maintain social distancing, do not let other people pet your dog when you are out for a walk.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Animals are only being tested in very rare circumstances.
Routine testing of animals is not recommended at this time, and any tests done on animals are done on a case by case basis.
For example, if the pet of a COVID-19 patient has a new, concerning illness with symptoms similar to those of COVID-19, the animals veterinarian might consult with public health and animal health officials to determine if testing is needed.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
There is no reason to think that any animals, including shelter pets, play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
The first case of a wild animal testing positive for the virus in the United States was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
However, this tiger was in a captive zoo environment ,and public health officials believe the tiger became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected and spreading the virus.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal iconexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading.
Some people are worried about getting the disease from these people.
Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, toward people who live in certain parts of the world, people who have traveled internationally, people who were in quarantine, or healthcare professionals.
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
People can fight stigma by providing social support in situations where you notice this is occurring.
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient.
See resources on mental health and coping during COVID-19.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
CDCs COVID-19 case numbers include many publicly reported numbers, including information from state, local, territorial, international and external partners.
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in people and may different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people.
This occurred with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and now with the virus that causes COVID-19.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
All three of these viruses have their origins in bats.
The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initially posted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.
However, the exact source of this virus is unknown.
More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.
The number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The growing number of cases in part reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person.
People are thought to be most contagious when they are symptomatic (the sickest).
That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
More recently the virus has also been detected in asymptomatic persons.
How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made using a test-based or non-test-based strategy (i.e.
time since illness started and time since recovery) in consultation with state and local public health officials.
The decision involves considering the specifics of each situation, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and the results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Learn more about CDCs guidance on when to release someone from isolation and discharge hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
For information on when someone who has been sick with COVID-19 is able to stop home isolation see Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19.
Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease.
Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure.
For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure because the incubation period for this virus is 2 to 14 days.
Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets.
Currently, there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food.
Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds for general food safety.
Throughout the day use a tissue to cover your coughing or sneezing, and wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, like a packaging container, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging.
Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.
Based on information about this novel coronavirus thus far, it seems unlikely that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food – additional investigation is needed.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Generally coronaviruses survive for shorter periods at higher temperatures and higher humidity than in cooler or dryer environments.
However, we dont have direct data for this virus, nor do we have direct data for a temperature-based cutoff for inactivation at this point.
The necessary temperature would also be based on the materials of the surface, the environment, etc.
Regardless of temperature please follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfection.
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the risk assessment may change daily.
The latest updates are available on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) website.
COVID-19 case counts for the United States are updated regularly online.
See the current U.S. case count of COVID-19.
Visit the COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
There is information for people who have had close contact with a person confirmed to have, or being evaluated for, COVID-19 available online.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people must go into public settings (grocery stores, for example).
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
You can learn more about who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 at People who are at higher risk for severe illness.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at Prevention for 2019 Novel Coronavirus and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
More information on Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally presented with mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is much more to be learned about how the disease impacts children.
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a cloth face covering that covers their nose and mouth when they are out in the community.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the face covering without assistance.
Wearing cloth face coverings is a public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning ,and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical face masks and N95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare personnel and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
If appropriate, explain to them that most illness from COVID-19 seems to be mild.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
CDC offers resources to help talk with children about COVID-19.
This is a new virus and we are still learning about it, but so far, there does not seem to be a lot of illness in children.
Most illness, including serious illness, is happening in adults of working age and older adults.
However, children do get the virus and become ill.
Many schools across the country have announced dismissals for temporary periods.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Children with complex, chronic medical conditions, including children with physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional differences, can have special healthcare needs.
Its not known yet whether all of these children are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing cloth face coverings, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on ways to cope with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19:
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Practice everyday preventive actions to help reduce your risk of getting sick and remind everyone in your home to do the same.
These actions are especially important for older adults and people who have severe chronic medical conditions:
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Talk to the school or facility about their emergency operations plan.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
CDC recommends handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or, using alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available.
These actions are part of everyday preventive actions individuals can take to slow the spread of respiratory diseases like COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal iconexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidancepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
See FAQs about hand hygiene for healthcare personnel responding to COVID-2019.
During an outbreak, stay calm and put your preparedness plan to work.
Follow the steps below:
Put your household plan into action.
Depending on the situation, public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19, such as school dismissals.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or and watch for communication from your childs school.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Follow the advice of your local health officials.
Stay home if you can.
Talk to your employer to discuss working from home, taking leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
Employers should be aware that more employees may need to stay at home to care for sick children or other sick family members than is usual in case of a community outbreak.
CDC makes recommendations, shares information, and provides guidance to help slow down the spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. including guidance for schools and businesses.
CDC regularly shares information and provides assistance to state, local, territorial, and tribal health authorities.
These local authorities are responsible for making decisions including  stay at home or shelter in place.
What is included in these orders and how they are implemented are also decided by local authorities.
These decisions may also depend on many factors such as how the virus is spreading in a certain community.
Please contact your local health department to find out more.
CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
Employers, schools, and organizations may decide to visibly screen for symptoms or perform on-site symptom checks.
If your employer, school, or organization requires you to present documentation regarding COVID-19 before returning to work or school (for example, proof of a negative COVID-19 lab test, if a test was performed, contact your healthcare provider to ask if he or she would be able to provide a form of documentation for you.
Documentation of self-isolation and self-quarantine may not be possible.
CDC has guidance for when and how people with COVID-19 can discontinue home isolation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html.
CDC also has guidance for what people should do if they think they have been exposed or feel sick: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Current symptoms reported for patients with COVID-19 have included mild to severe respiratory illness with fever1, cough, and difficulty breathing.
Read about COVID-19 Symptoms.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
For information about testing, see Testing for COVID-19.
The process and locations for testing vary from place to place.
Contact your state, local, tribal, or territorial department for more information, or reach out to a medical provider.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC while medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find someplace to get tested.
See Testing for COVID-19 for more information.
Using the CDC-developed diagnostic test, a negative result means that the virus that causes COVID-19 was not found in the persons sample.
In the early stages of infection, it is possible the virus will not be detected.
For COVID-19, a negative test result for a sample collected while a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID-19 virus is not causing their current illness.
There are actually many tests being used to diagnose COVID-19 that the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
All of these diagnostic tests identify the virus in samples from the respiratory system, such as from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs.
Some tests are conducted at the testing site you visit, and results are available to you within minutes.
Other tests must be sent to a laboratory to analyze, a process that takes 1-2 days once the lab receives your samples.
Locations and types of testing sites vary depending on where you live (see question: Where can I get tested).
Check with your testing site to learn which test it uses.
You can find a patient information sheet about each test on the FDA websiteexternal icon.
In the coming weeks, healthcare providers in most states will begin offering home collection kits, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
A healthcare provider will need to give you the approved kit – the Pixel by LabCorp COVID-19 test home collection kit.
You will be able to collect your sample (a nasal swab) at home and then send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
For more information please see FDAs most recent press releaseexternal icon.
Serology testing checks a sample of a persons blood to look for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
These antibodies are produced when someone has been infected, so a positive result from this test indicates that person was previously infected with the virus.
CDC is working with other federal agencies to evaluate the performance of commercially manufactured serology tests that are becoming increasingly available from healthcare providers.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
We do not know yet if the antibodies that result from infection with SARS-CoV-2 can protect someone from reinfection with this virus or how long antibodies to the virus will protect someone.
Scientists are conducting research to answer those questions.
Serology tests may not be able to tell you if you are currently infected because it typically takes 1 to 2 weeks to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
To tell if you are currently infected, you would need a test that identifies the virus in samples from your upper respiratory system, such as a nasopharyngeal swab.
CDC and partners are investigating to determine if you can get sick with COVID-19 more than once.
At this time, we are not sure if you can become re-infected.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
If you are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, you should:
If there is an outbreak in your community, stay home as much as possible.
Watch for symptoms and emergency signs.
If you get sick, stay home and call your doctor.
More information on how to prepare, what to do if you get sick, and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on People at Risk for Serious Illness from COVID-19.
As CDC gets more information about COVID-19 cases here in the United States, we will update this list as needed.
Currently, there is no evidence to show that taking ibuprofen or naproxen can lead to a more severe infection of COVID-19.
People with high blood pressure should take their blood pressure medications, as directed, and work with their healthcare provider to make sure that their blood pressure is as well controlled as possible.
Any changes to your medications should only be made by your healthcare provider.
Based on available information, adults aged 65 years and older and people of any age with underlying medical conditions included on this list are at higher risk for severe illness and poorer outcomes from COVID-19.
CDC is collecting and analyzing data regularly and will update the list when we learn more.
People with underlying medical conditions not on the list might also be at higher risk and should consult with their healthcare provider if they are concerned.
We encourage all people, regardless of risk, to:
Generally, well-controlled means that your condition is stable, not life-threatening, and laboratory assessments and other findings are as similar as possible to those without the health condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Severity typically means how much impact the illness or condition has on your bodys function.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control, including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigation, see Information for Healthcare Professionals.
For information on specimen collection and shipment, see Information for Laboratories.
For information for public health professional on COVID-19, see Information for Public Health Professionals.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread from close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) with a person who is currently sick with COVID-19.
The virus likely spreads primarily through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, similar to how influenza and other respiratory infections spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N-95 respirator).
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
After removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
A funeral or visitation service can be held for a person who has died of COVID-19.
Funeral home workers should follow their routine infection prevention and control precautions when handling a decedent who died of COVID-19.
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
For transporting a body after the body has been bagged, disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Embalming can be conducted.
During embalming, follow Standard Precautions including the use of additional PPE if splashing is expected (e.g.
disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N95 respirator).
Wear appropriate respiratory protection if any procedures will generate aerosols or if required for chemicals used in accordance with the manufacturers label.
Wear heavy-duty gloves over nitrile disposable gloves if there is a risk of cuts, puncture wounds, or other injuries that break the skin.
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
After cleaning and removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water is not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
Decedents with COVID-19 can be buried or cremated, but check for any additional state and local requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the remains of individuals who have died of certain infectious diseases.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
CDC is working with other federal partners in a whole-of-government response.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes available.
CDC works 24/7 to protect peoples health.
More information about CDCs response to COVID-19 is available online.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
A small number of pets have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after contact with people with COVID-19.
Pets have other types of coronaviruses that can make them sick, like canine and feline coronaviruses.
These other coronaviruses cannot infect people and are not related to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
No.
At this time, routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Until we learn more about this new coronavirus, you should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would with people.
When possible, have another member of your household care for your animals while you are sick.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a cloth face covering.
We dont know for sure which animals can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
A tiger at a zoo in New York has also tested positive for the virus.
Recent research shows that ferrets, cats, and golden Syrian hamsters can be experimentally infected with the virus and can spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Pigs, chickens, and ducks did not become infected or spread the infection based on results from these studies.
Data from one study suggested dogs are not as likely to become infected with the virus as cats and ferrets.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus that causes COVID-19 and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus and how it spreads, but it appears it can spread from humans to animals in some situations.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Most of these animals had contact with a person with COVID-19.
A tiger at a New York zoo has also tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person, typically through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
People sick with COVID-19 should isolate themselves from other people and animals, including pets, during their illness until we know more about how this virus affects animals.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a cloth face covering and wash your hands before and after you interact with pets.
Walking a dog is important for both animal and human health and well-being.
Walk dogs on a leash, maintaining at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other people and animals, do not gather in groups, and stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings.
Do not go to dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather.
To help maintain social distancing, do not let other people pet your dog when you are out for a walk.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Animals are only being tested in very rare circumstances.
Routine testing of animals is not recommended at this time, and any tests done on animals are done on a case by case basis.
For example, if the pet of a COVID-19 patient has a new, concerning illness with symptoms similar to those of COVID-19, the animals veterinarian might consult with public health and animal health officials to determine if testing is needed.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
There is no reason to think that any animals, including shelter pets, play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
The first case of a wild animal testing positive for the virus in the United States was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
However, this tiger was in a captive zoo environment ,and public health officials believe the tiger became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected and spreading the virus.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal iconexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading.
Some people are worried about getting the disease from these people.
Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, toward people who live in certain parts of the world, people who have traveled internationally, people who were in quarantine, or healthcare professionals.
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
People can fight stigma by providing social support in situations where you notice this is occurring.
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient.
See resources on mental health and coping during COVID-19.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
CDCs COVID-19 case numbers include many publicly reported numbers, including information from state, local, territorial, international and external partners.
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in people and may different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people.
This occurred with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and now with the virus that causes COVID-19.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
All three of these viruses have their origins in bats.
The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initially posted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.
However, the exact source of this virus is unknown.
More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.
The number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The growing number of cases in part reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person.
People are thought to be most contagious when they are symptomatic (the sickest).
That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
More recently the virus has also been detected in asymptomatic persons.
How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made using a test-based or non-test-based strategy (i.e.
time since illness started and time since recovery) in consultation with state and local public health officials.
The decision involves considering the specifics of each situation, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and the results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Learn more about CDCs guidance on when to release someone from isolation and discharge hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
For information on when someone who has been sick with COVID-19 is able to stop home isolation see Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19.
Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease.
Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure.
For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure because the incubation period for this virus is 2 to 14 days.
Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets.
Currently, there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food.
Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds for general food safety.
Throughout the day use a tissue to cover your coughing or sneezing, and wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, like a packaging container, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging.
Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.
Based on information about this novel coronavirus thus far, it seems unlikely that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food – additional investigation is needed.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Generally coronaviruses survive for shorter periods at higher temperatures and higher humidity than in cooler or dryer environments.
However, we dont have direct data for this virus, nor do we have direct data for a temperature-based cutoff for inactivation at this point.
The necessary temperature would also be based on the materials of the surface, the environment, etc.
Regardless of temperature please follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfection.
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the risk assessment may change daily.
The latest updates are available on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) website.
COVID-19 case counts for the United States are updated regularly online.
See the current U.S. case count of COVID-19.
Visit the COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
There is information for people who have had close contact with a person confirmed to have, or being evaluated for, COVID-19 available online.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people must go into public settings (grocery stores, for example).
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
You can learn more about who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 at People who are at higher risk for severe illness.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at Prevention for 2019 Novel Coronavirus and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
More information on Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally presented with mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is much more to be learned about how the disease impacts children.
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a cloth face covering that covers their nose and mouth when they are out in the community.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the face covering without assistance.
Wearing cloth face coverings is a public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning ,and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical face masks and N95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare personnel and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
If appropriate, explain to them that most illness from COVID-19 seems to be mild.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
CDC offers resources to help talk with children about COVID-19.
This is a new virus and we are still learning about it, but so far, there does not seem to be a lot of illness in children.
Most illness, including serious illness, is happening in adults of working age and older adults.
However, children do get the virus and become ill.
Many schools across the country have announced dismissals for temporary periods.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Children with complex, chronic medical conditions, including children with physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional differences, can have special healthcare needs.
Its not known yet whether all of these children are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing cloth face coverings, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on ways to cope with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19:
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Practice everyday preventive actions to help reduce your risk of getting sick and remind everyone in your home to do the same.
These actions are especially important for older adults and people who have severe chronic medical conditions:
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Talk to the school or facility about their emergency operations plan.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
CDC recommends handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or, using alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available.
These actions are part of everyday preventive actions individuals can take to slow the spread of respiratory diseases like COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal iconexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidancepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
See FAQs about hand hygiene for healthcare personnel responding to COVID-2019.
During an outbreak, stay calm and put your preparedness plan to work.
Follow the steps below:
Put your household plan into action.
Depending on the situation, public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19, such as school dismissals.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or and watch for communication from your childs school.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Follow the advice of your local health officials.
Stay home if you can.
Talk to your employer to discuss working from home, taking leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
Employers should be aware that more employees may need to stay at home to care for sick children or other sick family members than is usual in case of a community outbreak.
CDC makes recommendations, shares information, and provides guidance to help slow down the spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. including guidance for schools and businesses.
CDC regularly shares information and provides assistance to state, local, territorial, and tribal health authorities.
These local authorities are responsible for making decisions including  stay at home or shelter in place.
What is included in these orders and how they are implemented are also decided by local authorities.
These decisions may also depend on many factors such as how the virus is spreading in a certain community.
Please contact your local health department to find out more.
CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
Employers, schools, and organizations may decide to visibly screen for symptoms or perform on-site symptom checks.
If your employer, school, or organization requires you to present documentation regarding COVID-19 before returning to work or school (for example, proof of a negative COVID-19 lab test, if a test was performed, contact your healthcare provider to ask if he or she would be able to provide a form of documentation for you.
Documentation of self-isolation and self-quarantine may not be possible.
CDC has guidance for when and how people with COVID-19 can discontinue home isolation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html.
CDC also has guidance for what people should do if they think they have been exposed or feel sick: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Current symptoms reported for patients with COVID-19 have included mild to severe respiratory illness with fever1, cough, and difficulty breathing.
Read about COVID-19 Symptoms.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
For information about testing, see Testing for COVID-19.
The process and locations for testing vary from place to place.
Contact your state, local, tribal, or territorial department for more information, or reach out to a medical provider.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC while medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find someplace to get tested.
See Testing for COVID-19 for more information.
Using the CDC-developed diagnostic test, a negative result means that the virus that causes COVID-19 was not found in the persons sample.
In the early stages of infection, it is possible the virus will not be detected.
For COVID-19, a negative test result for a sample collected while a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID-19 virus is not causing their current illness.
There are actually many tests being used to diagnose COVID-19 that the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
All of these diagnostic tests identify the virus in samples from the respiratory system, such as from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs.
Some tests are conducted at the testing site you visit, and results are available to you within minutes.
Other tests must be sent to a laboratory to analyze, a process that takes 1-2 days once the lab receives your samples.
Locations and types of testing sites vary depending on where you live (see question: Where can I get tested).
Check with your testing site to learn which test it uses.
You can find a patient information sheet about each test on the FDA websiteexternal icon.
In the coming weeks, healthcare providers in most states will begin offering home collection kits, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
A healthcare provider will need to give you the approved kit – the Pixel by LabCorp COVID-19 test home collection kit.
You will be able to collect your sample (a nasal swab) at home and then send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
For more information please see FDAs most recent press releaseexternal icon.
Serology testing checks a sample of a persons blood to look for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
These antibodies are produced when someone has been infected, so a positive result from this test indicates that person was previously infected with the virus.
CDC is working with other federal agencies to evaluate the performance of commercially manufactured serology tests that are becoming increasingly available from healthcare providers.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
We do not know yet if the antibodies that result from infection with SARS-CoV-2 can protect someone from reinfection with this virus or how long antibodies to the virus will protect someone.
Scientists are conducting research to answer those questions.
Serology tests may not be able to tell you if you are currently infected because it typically takes 1 to 2 weeks to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
To tell if you are currently infected, you would need a test that identifies the virus in samples from your upper respiratory system, such as a nasopharyngeal swab.
CDC and partners are investigating to determine if you can get sick with COVID-19 more than once.
At this time, we are not sure if you can become re-infected.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
If you are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, you should:
If there is an outbreak in your community, stay home as much as possible.
Watch for symptoms and emergency signs.
If you get sick, stay home and call your doctor.
More information on how to prepare, what to do if you get sick, and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on People at Risk for Serious Illness from COVID-19.
As CDC gets more information about COVID-19 cases here in the United States, we will update this list as needed.
Currently, there is no evidence to show that taking ibuprofen or naproxen can lead to a more severe infection of COVID-19.
People with high blood pressure should take their blood pressure medications, as directed, and work with their healthcare provider to make sure that their blood pressure is as well controlled as possible.
Any changes to your medications should only be made by your healthcare provider.
Based on available information, adults aged 65 years and older and people of any age with underlying medical conditions included on this list are at higher risk for severe illness and poorer outcomes from COVID-19.
CDC is collecting and analyzing data regularly and will update the list when we learn more.
People with underlying medical conditions not on the list might also be at higher risk and should consult with their healthcare provider if they are concerned.
We encourage all people, regardless of risk, to:
Generally, well-controlled means that your condition is stable, not life-threatening, and laboratory assessments and other findings are as similar as possible to those without the health condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Severity typically means how much impact the illness or condition has on your bodys function.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control, including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigation, see Information for Healthcare Professionals.
For information on specimen collection and shipment, see Information for Laboratories.
For information for public health professional on COVID-19, see Information for Public Health Professionals.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread from close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) with a person who is currently sick with COVID-19.
The virus likely spreads primarily through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, similar to how influenza and other respiratory infections spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N-95 respirator).
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
After removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
A funeral or visitation service can be held for a person who has died of COVID-19.
Funeral home workers should follow their routine infection prevention and control precautions when handling a decedent who died of COVID-19.
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
For transporting a body after the body has been bagged, disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Embalming can be conducted.
During embalming, follow Standard Precautions including the use of additional PPE if splashing is expected (e.g.
disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N95 respirator).
Wear appropriate respiratory protection if any procedures will generate aerosols or if required for chemicals used in accordance with the manufacturers label.
Wear heavy-duty gloves over nitrile disposable gloves if there is a risk of cuts, puncture wounds, or other injuries that break the skin.
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
After cleaning and removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water is not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
Decedents with COVID-19 can be buried or cremated, but check for any additional state and local requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the remains of individuals who have died of certain infectious diseases.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
CDC is working with other federal partners in a whole-of-government response.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes available.
CDC works 24/7 to protect peoples health.
More information about CDCs response to COVID-19 is available online.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
A small number of pets have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after contact with people with COVID-19.
Pets have other types of coronaviruses that can make them sick, like canine and feline coronaviruses.
These other coronaviruses cannot infect people and are not related to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
No.
At this time, routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Until we learn more about this new coronavirus, you should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would with people.
When possible, have another member of your household care for your animals while you are sick.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a cloth face covering.
We dont know for sure which animals can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
A tiger at a zoo in New York has also tested positive for the virus.
Recent research shows that ferrets, cats, and golden Syrian hamsters can be experimentally infected with the virus and can spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Pigs, chickens, and ducks did not become infected or spread the infection based on results from these studies.
Data from one study suggested dogs are not as likely to become infected with the virus as cats and ferrets.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus that causes COVID-19 and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus and how it spreads, but it appears it can spread from humans to animals in some situations.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Most of these animals had contact with a person with COVID-19.
A tiger at a New York zoo has also tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person, typically through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
People sick with COVID-19 should isolate themselves from other people and animals, including pets, during their illness until we know more about how this virus affects animals.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a cloth face covering and wash your hands before and after you interact with pets.
Walking a dog is important for both animal and human health and well-being.
Walk dogs on a leash, maintaining at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other people and animals, do not gather in groups, and stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings.
Do not go to dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather.
To help maintain social distancing, do not let other people pet your dog when you are out for a walk.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Animals are only being tested in very rare circumstances.
Routine testing of animals is not recommended at this time, and any tests done on animals are done on a case by case basis.
For example, if the pet of a COVID-19 patient has a new, concerning illness with symptoms similar to those of COVID-19, the animals veterinarian might consult with public health and animal health officials to determine if testing is needed.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
There is no reason to think that any animals, including shelter pets, play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
The first case of a wild animal testing positive for the virus in the United States was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
However, this tiger was in a captive zoo environment ,and public health officials believe the tiger became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected and spreading the virus.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal iconexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading.
Some people are worried about getting the disease from these people.
Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, toward people who live in certain parts of the world, people who have traveled internationally, people who were in quarantine, or healthcare professionals.
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
People can fight stigma by providing social support in situations where you notice this is occurring.
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient.
See resources on mental health and coping during COVID-19.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
CDCs COVID-19 case numbers include many publicly reported numbers, including information from state, local, territorial, international and external partners.
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in people and may different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people.
This occurred with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and now with the virus that causes COVID-19.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
All three of these viruses have their origins in bats.
The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initially posted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.
However, the exact source of this virus is unknown.
More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.
The number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The growing number of cases in part reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person.
People are thought to be most contagious when they are symptomatic (the sickest).
That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
More recently the virus has also been detected in asymptomatic persons.
How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made using a test-based or non-test-based strategy (i.e.
time since illness started and time since recovery) in consultation with state and local public health officials.
The decision involves considering the specifics of each situation, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and the results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Learn more about CDCs guidance on when to release someone from isolation and discharge hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
For information on when someone who has been sick with COVID-19 is able to stop home isolation see Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19.
Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease.
Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure.
For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure because the incubation period for this virus is 2 to 14 days.
Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets.
Currently, there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food.
Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds for general food safety.
Throughout the day use a tissue to cover your coughing or sneezing, and wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, like a packaging container, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging.
Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.
Based on information about this novel coronavirus thus far, it seems unlikely that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food – additional investigation is needed.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Generally coronaviruses survive for shorter periods at higher temperatures and higher humidity than in cooler or dryer environments.
However, we dont have direct data for this virus, nor do we have direct data for a temperature-based cutoff for inactivation at this point.
The necessary temperature would also be based on the materials of the surface, the environment, etc.
Regardless of temperature please follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfection.
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the risk assessment may change daily.
The latest updates are available on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) website.
COVID-19 case counts for the United States are updated regularly online.
See the current U.S. case count of COVID-19.
Visit the COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
There is information for people who have had close contact with a person confirmed to have, or being evaluated for, COVID-19 available online.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people must go into public settings (grocery stores, for example).
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
You can learn more about who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 at People who are at higher risk for severe illness.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at Prevention for 2019 Novel Coronavirus and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
More information on Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally presented with mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is much more to be learned about how the disease impacts children.
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a cloth face covering that covers their nose and mouth when they are out in the community.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the face covering without assistance.
Wearing cloth face coverings is a public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning ,and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical face masks and N95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare personnel and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
If appropriate, explain to them that most illness from COVID-19 seems to be mild.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
CDC offers resources to help talk with children about COVID-19.
This is a new virus and we are still learning about it, but so far, there does not seem to be a lot of illness in children.
Most illness, including serious illness, is happening in adults of working age and older adults.
However, children do get the virus and become ill.
Many schools across the country have announced dismissals for temporary periods.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Children with complex, chronic medical conditions, including children with physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional differences, can have special healthcare needs.
Its not known yet whether all of these children are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing cloth face coverings, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on ways to cope with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19:
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Practice everyday preventive actions to help reduce your risk of getting sick and remind everyone in your home to do the same.
These actions are especially important for older adults and people who have severe chronic medical conditions:
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Talk to the school or facility about their emergency operations plan.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
CDC recommends handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or, using alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available.
These actions are part of everyday preventive actions individuals can take to slow the spread of respiratory diseases like COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal iconexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidancepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
See FAQs about hand hygiene for healthcare personnel responding to COVID-2019.
During an outbreak, stay calm and put your preparedness plan to work.
Follow the steps below:
Put your household plan into action.
Depending on the situation, public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19, such as school dismissals.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or and watch for communication from your childs school.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Follow the advice of your local health officials.
Stay home if you can.
Talk to your employer to discuss working from home, taking leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
Employers should be aware that more employees may need to stay at home to care for sick children or other sick family members than is usual in case of a community outbreak.
CDC makes recommendations, shares information, and provides guidance to help slow down the spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. including guidance for schools and businesses.
CDC regularly shares information and provides assistance to state, local, territorial, and tribal health authorities.
These local authorities are responsible for making decisions including  stay at home or shelter in place.
What is included in these orders and how they are implemented are also decided by local authorities.
These decisions may also depend on many factors such as how the virus is spreading in a certain community.
Please contact your local health department to find out more.
CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
Employers, schools, and organizations may decide to visibly screen for symptoms or perform on-site symptom checks.
If your employer, school, or organization requires you to present documentation regarding COVID-19 before returning to work or school (for example, proof of a negative COVID-19 lab test, if a test was performed, contact your healthcare provider to ask if he or she would be able to provide a form of documentation for you.
Documentation of self-isolation and self-quarantine may not be possible.
CDC has guidance for when and how people with COVID-19 can discontinue home isolation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html.
CDC also has guidance for what people should do if they think they have been exposed or feel sick: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Current symptoms reported for patients with COVID-19 have included mild to severe respiratory illness with fever1, cough, and difficulty breathing.
Read about COVID-19 Symptoms.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
For information about testing, see Testing for COVID-19.
The process and locations for testing vary from place to place.
Contact your state, local, tribal, or territorial department for more information, or reach out to a medical provider.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC while medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find someplace to get tested.
See Testing for COVID-19 for more information.
Using the CDC-developed diagnostic test, a negative result means that the virus that causes COVID-19 was not found in the persons sample.
In the early stages of infection, it is possible the virus will not be detected.
For COVID-19, a negative test result for a sample collected while a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID-19 virus is not causing their current illness.
There are actually many tests being used to diagnose COVID-19 that the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
All of these diagnostic tests identify the virus in samples from the respiratory system, such as from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs.
Some tests are conducted at the testing site you visit, and results are available to you within minutes.
Other tests must be sent to a laboratory to analyze, a process that takes 1-2 days once the lab receives your samples.
Locations and types of testing sites vary depending on where you live (see question: Where can I get tested).
Check with your testing site to learn which test it uses.
You can find a patient information sheet about each test on the FDA websiteexternal icon.
In the coming weeks, healthcare providers in most states will begin offering home collection kits, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
A healthcare provider will need to give you the approved kit – the Pixel by LabCorp COVID-19 test home collection kit.
You will be able to collect your sample (a nasal swab) at home and then send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
For more information please see FDAs most recent press releaseexternal icon.
Serology testing checks a sample of a persons blood to look for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
These antibodies are produced when someone has been infected, so a positive result from this test indicates that person was previously infected with the virus.
CDC is working with other federal agencies to evaluate the performance of commercially manufactured serology tests that are becoming increasingly available from healthcare providers.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
We do not know yet if the antibodies that result from infection with SARS-CoV-2 can protect someone from reinfection with this virus or how long antibodies to the virus will protect someone.
Scientists are conducting research to answer those questions.
Serology tests may not be able to tell you if you are currently infected because it typically takes 1 to 2 weeks to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
To tell if you are currently infected, you would need a test that identifies the virus in samples from your upper respiratory system, such as a nasopharyngeal swab.
CDC and partners are investigating to determine if you can get sick with COVID-19 more than once.
At this time, we are not sure if you can become re-infected.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
If you are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, you should:
If there is an outbreak in your community, stay home as much as possible.
Watch for symptoms and emergency signs.
If you get sick, stay home and call your doctor.
More information on how to prepare, what to do if you get sick, and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on People at Risk for Serious Illness from COVID-19.
As CDC gets more information about COVID-19 cases here in the United States, we will update this list as needed.
Currently, there is no evidence to show that taking ibuprofen or naproxen can lead to a more severe infection of COVID-19.
People with high blood pressure should take their blood pressure medications, as directed, and work with their healthcare provider to make sure that their blood pressure is as well controlled as possible.
Any changes to your medications should only be made by your healthcare provider.
Based on available information, adults aged 65 years and older and people of any age with underlying medical conditions included on this list are at higher risk for severe illness and poorer outcomes from COVID-19.
CDC is collecting and analyzing data regularly and will update the list when we learn more.
People with underlying medical conditions not on the list might also be at higher risk and should consult with their healthcare provider if they are concerned.
We encourage all people, regardless of risk, to:
Generally, well-controlled means that your condition is stable, not life-threatening, and laboratory assessments and other findings are as similar as possible to those without the health condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Severity typically means how much impact the illness or condition has on your bodys function.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control, including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigation, see Information for Healthcare Professionals.
For information on specimen collection and shipment, see Information for Laboratories.
For information for public health professional on COVID-19, see Information for Public Health Professionals.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread from close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) with a person who is currently sick with COVID-19.
The virus likely spreads primarily through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, similar to how influenza and other respiratory infections spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N-95 respirator).
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
After removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
A funeral or visitation service can be held for a person who has died of COVID-19.
Funeral home workers should follow their routine infection prevention and control precautions when handling a decedent who died of COVID-19.
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
For transporting a body after the body has been bagged, disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Embalming can be conducted.
During embalming, follow Standard Precautions including the use of additional PPE if splashing is expected (e.g.
disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N95 respirator).
Wear appropriate respiratory protection if any procedures will generate aerosols or if required for chemicals used in accordance with the manufacturers label.
Wear heavy-duty gloves over nitrile disposable gloves if there is a risk of cuts, puncture wounds, or other injuries that break the skin.
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
After cleaning and removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water is not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
Decedents with COVID-19 can be buried or cremated, but check for any additional state and local requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the remains of individuals who have died of certain infectious diseases.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
CDC is working with other federal partners in a whole-of-government response.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes available.
CDC works 24/7 to protect peoples health.
More information about CDCs response to COVID-19 is available online.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
A small number of pets have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after contact with people with COVID-19.
Pets have other types of coronaviruses that can make them sick, like canine and feline coronaviruses.
These other coronaviruses cannot infect people and are not related to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
No.
At this time, routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Until we learn more about this new coronavirus, you should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would with people.
When possible, have another member of your household care for your animals while you are sick.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a cloth face covering.
We dont know for sure which animals can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
A tiger at a zoo in New York has also tested positive for the virus.
Recent research shows that ferrets, cats, and golden Syrian hamsters can be experimentally infected with the virus and can spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Pigs, chickens, and ducks did not become infected or spread the infection based on results from these studies.
Data from one study suggested dogs are not as likely to become infected with the virus as cats and ferrets.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus that causes COVID-19 and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus and how it spreads, but it appears it can spread from humans to animals in some situations.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Most of these animals had contact with a person with COVID-19.
A tiger at a New York zoo has also tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person, typically through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
People sick with COVID-19 should isolate themselves from other people and animals, including pets, during their illness until we know more about how this virus affects animals.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a cloth face covering and wash your hands before and after you interact with pets.
Walking a dog is important for both animal and human health and well-being.
Walk dogs on a leash, maintaining at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other people and animals, do not gather in groups, and stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings.
Do not go to dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather.
To help maintain social distancing, do not let other people pet your dog when you are out for a walk.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Animals are only being tested in very rare circumstances.
Routine testing of animals is not recommended at this time, and any tests done on animals are done on a case by case basis.
For example, if the pet of a COVID-19 patient has a new, concerning illness with symptoms similar to those of COVID-19, the animals veterinarian might consult with public health and animal health officials to determine if testing is needed.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
There is no reason to think that any animals, including shelter pets, play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
The first case of a wild animal testing positive for the virus in the United States was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
However, this tiger was in a captive zoo environment ,and public health officials believe the tiger became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected and spreading the virus.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal iconexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading.
Some people are worried about getting the disease from these people.
Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, toward people who live in certain parts of the world, people who have traveled internationally, people who were in quarantine, or healthcare professionals.
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
People can fight stigma by providing social support in situations where you notice this is occurring.
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient.
See resources on mental health and coping during COVID-19.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
CDCs COVID-19 case numbers include many publicly reported numbers, including information from state, local, territorial, international and external partners.
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in people and may different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people.
This occurred with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and now with the virus that causes COVID-19.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
All three of these viruses have their origins in bats.
The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initially posted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.
However, the exact source of this virus is unknown.
More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.
The number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The growing number of cases in part reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person.
People are thought to be most contagious when they are symptomatic (the sickest).
That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
More recently the virus has also been detected in asymptomatic persons.
How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made using a test-based or non-test-based strategy (i.e.
time since illness started and time since recovery) in consultation with state and local public health officials.
The decision involves considering the specifics of each situation, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and the results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Learn more about CDCs guidance on when to release someone from isolation and discharge hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
For information on when someone who has been sick with COVID-19 is able to stop home isolation see Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19.
Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease.
Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure.
For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure because the incubation period for this virus is 2 to 14 days.
Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets.
Currently, there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food.
Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds for general food safety.
Throughout the day use a tissue to cover your coughing or sneezing, and wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, like a packaging container, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging.
Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.
Based on information about this novel coronavirus thus far, it seems unlikely that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food – additional investigation is needed.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Generally coronaviruses survive for shorter periods at higher temperatures and higher humidity than in cooler or dryer environments.
However, we dont have direct data for this virus, nor do we have direct data for a temperature-based cutoff for inactivation at this point.
The necessary temperature would also be based on the materials of the surface, the environment, etc.
Regardless of temperature please follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfection.
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the risk assessment may change daily.
The latest updates are available on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) website.
COVID-19 case counts for the United States are updated regularly online.
See the current U.S. case count of COVID-19.
Visit the COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
There is information for people who have had close contact with a person confirmed to have, or being evaluated for, COVID-19 available online.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people must go into public settings (grocery stores, for example).
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
You can learn more about who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 at People who are at higher risk for severe illness.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at Prevention for 2019 Novel Coronavirus and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
More information on Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally presented with mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is much more to be learned about how the disease impacts children.
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a cloth face covering that covers their nose and mouth when they are out in the community.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the face covering without assistance.
Wearing cloth face coverings is a public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning ,and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical face masks and N95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare personnel and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
If appropriate, explain to them that most illness from COVID-19 seems to be mild.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
CDC offers resources to help talk with children about COVID-19.
This is a new virus and we are still learning about it, but so far, there does not seem to be a lot of illness in children.
Most illness, including serious illness, is happening in adults of working age and older adults.
However, children do get the virus and become ill.
Many schools across the country have announced dismissals for temporary periods.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Children with complex, chronic medical conditions, including children with physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional differences, can have special healthcare needs.
Its not known yet whether all of these children are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing cloth face coverings, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on ways to cope with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19:
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Practice everyday preventive actions to help reduce your risk of getting sick and remind everyone in your home to do the same.
These actions are especially important for older adults and people who have severe chronic medical conditions:
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Talk to the school or facility about their emergency operations plan.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
CDC recommends handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or, using alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available.
These actions are part of everyday preventive actions individuals can take to slow the spread of respiratory diseases like COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal iconexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidancepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
See FAQs about hand hygiene for healthcare personnel responding to COVID-2019.
During an outbreak, stay calm and put your preparedness plan to work.
Follow the steps below:
Put your household plan into action.
Depending on the situation, public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19, such as school dismissals.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or and watch for communication from your childs school.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Follow the advice of your local health officials.
Stay home if you can.
Talk to your employer to discuss working from home, taking leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
Employers should be aware that more employees may need to stay at home to care for sick children or other sick family members than is usual in case of a community outbreak.
CDC makes recommendations, shares information, and provides guidance to help slow down the spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. including guidance for schools and businesses.
CDC regularly shares information and provides assistance to state, local, territorial, and tribal health authorities.
These local authorities are responsible for making decisions including  stay at home or shelter in place.
What is included in these orders and how they are implemented are also decided by local authorities.
These decisions may also depend on many factors such as how the virus is spreading in a certain community.
Please contact your local health department to find out more.
CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
Employers, schools, and organizations may decide to visibly screen for symptoms or perform on-site symptom checks.
If your employer, school, or organization requires you to present documentation regarding COVID-19 before returning to work or school (for example, proof of a negative COVID-19 lab test, if a test was performed, contact your healthcare provider to ask if he or she would be able to provide a form of documentation for you.
Documentation of self-isolation and self-quarantine may not be possible.
CDC has guidance for when and how people with COVID-19 can discontinue home isolation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html.
CDC also has guidance for what people should do if they think they have been exposed or feel sick: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Current symptoms reported for patients with COVID-19 have included mild to severe respiratory illness with fever1, cough, and difficulty breathing.
Read about COVID-19 Symptoms.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
For information about testing, see Testing for COVID-19.
The process and locations for testing vary from place to place.
Contact your state, local, tribal, or territorial department for more information, or reach out to a medical provider.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC while medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find someplace to get tested.
See Testing for COVID-19 for more information.
Using the CDC-developed diagnostic test, a negative result means that the virus that causes COVID-19 was not found in the persons sample.
In the early stages of infection, it is possible the virus will not be detected.
For COVID-19, a negative test result for a sample collected while a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID-19 virus is not causing their current illness.
There are actually many tests being used to diagnose COVID-19 that the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
All of these diagnostic tests identify the virus in samples from the respiratory system, such as from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs.
Some tests are conducted at the testing site you visit, and results are available to you within minutes.
Other tests must be sent to a laboratory to analyze, a process that takes 1-2 days once the lab receives your samples.
Locations and types of testing sites vary depending on where you live (see question: Where can I get tested).
Check with your testing site to learn which test it uses.
You can find a patient information sheet about each test on the FDA websiteexternal icon.
In the coming weeks, healthcare providers in most states will begin offering home collection kits, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
A healthcare provider will need to give you the approved kit – the Pixel by LabCorp COVID-19 test home collection kit.
You will be able to collect your sample (a nasal swab) at home and then send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
For more information please see FDAs most recent press releaseexternal icon.
Serology testing checks a sample of a persons blood to look for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
These antibodies are produced when someone has been infected, so a positive result from this test indicates that person was previously infected with the virus.
CDC is working with other federal agencies to evaluate the performance of commercially manufactured serology tests that are becoming increasingly available from healthcare providers.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
We do not know yet if the antibodies that result from infection with SARS-CoV-2 can protect someone from reinfection with this virus or how long antibodies to the virus will protect someone.
Scientists are conducting research to answer those questions.
Serology tests may not be able to tell you if you are currently infected because it typically takes 1 to 2 weeks to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
To tell if you are currently infected, you would need a test that identifies the virus in samples from your upper respiratory system, such as a nasopharyngeal swab.
CDC and partners are investigating to determine if you can get sick with COVID-19 more than once.
At this time, we are not sure if you can become re-infected.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
If you are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, you should:
If there is an outbreak in your community, stay home as much as possible.
Watch for symptoms and emergency signs.
If you get sick, stay home and call your doctor.
More information on how to prepare, what to do if you get sick, and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on People at Risk for Serious Illness from COVID-19.
As CDC gets more information about COVID-19 cases here in the United States, we will update this list as needed.
Currently, there is no evidence to show that taking ibuprofen or naproxen can lead to a more severe infection of COVID-19.
People with high blood pressure should take their blood pressure medications, as directed, and work with their healthcare provider to make sure that their blood pressure is as well controlled as possible.
Any changes to your medications should only be made by your healthcare provider.
Based on available information, adults aged 65 years and older and people of any age with underlying medical conditions included on this list are at higher risk for severe illness and poorer outcomes from COVID-19.
CDC is collecting and analyzing data regularly and will update the list when we learn more.
People with underlying medical conditions not on the list might also be at higher risk and should consult with their healthcare provider if they are concerned.
We encourage all people, regardless of risk, to:
Generally, well-controlled means that your condition is stable, not life-threatening, and laboratory assessments and other findings are as similar as possible to those without the health condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Severity typically means how much impact the illness or condition has on your bodys function.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control, including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigation, see Information for Healthcare Professionals.
For information on specimen collection and shipment, see Information for Laboratories.
For information for public health professional on COVID-19, see Information for Public Health Professionals.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread from close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) with a person who is currently sick with COVID-19.
The virus likely spreads primarily through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, similar to how influenza and other respiratory infections spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N-95 respirator).
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
After removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
A funeral or visitation service can be held for a person who has died of COVID-19.
Funeral home workers should follow their routine infection prevention and control precautions when handling a decedent who died of COVID-19.
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
For transporting a body after the body has been bagged, disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Embalming can be conducted.
During embalming, follow Standard Precautions including the use of additional PPE if splashing is expected (e.g.
disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N95 respirator).
Wear appropriate respiratory protection if any procedures will generate aerosols or if required for chemicals used in accordance with the manufacturers label.
Wear heavy-duty gloves over nitrile disposable gloves if there is a risk of cuts, puncture wounds, or other injuries that break the skin.
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
After cleaning and removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water is not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
Decedents with COVID-19 can be buried or cremated, but check for any additional state and local requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the remains of individuals who have died of certain infectious diseases.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
CDC is working with other federal partners in a whole-of-government response.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes available.
CDC works 24/7 to protect peoples health.
More information about CDCs response to COVID-19 is available online.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
A small number of pets have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after contact with people with COVID-19.
Pets have other types of coronaviruses that can make them sick, like canine and feline coronaviruses.
These other coronaviruses cannot infect people and are not related to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
No.
At this time, routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Until we learn more about this new coronavirus, you should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would with people.
When possible, have another member of your household care for your animals while you are sick.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a cloth face covering.
We dont know for sure which animals can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
A tiger at a zoo in New York has also tested positive for the virus.
Recent research shows that ferrets, cats, and golden Syrian hamsters can be experimentally infected with the virus and can spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Pigs, chickens, and ducks did not become infected or spread the infection based on results from these studies.
Data from one study suggested dogs are not as likely to become infected with the virus as cats and ferrets.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus that causes COVID-19 and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus and how it spreads, but it appears it can spread from humans to animals in some situations.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Most of these animals had contact with a person with COVID-19.
A tiger at a New York zoo has also tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person, typically through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
People sick with COVID-19 should isolate themselves from other people and animals, including pets, during their illness until we know more about how this virus affects animals.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a cloth face covering and wash your hands before and after you interact with pets.
Walking a dog is important for both animal and human health and well-being.
Walk dogs on a leash, maintaining at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other people and animals, do not gather in groups, and stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings.
Do not go to dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather.
To help maintain social distancing, do not let other people pet your dog when you are out for a walk.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Animals are only being tested in very rare circumstances.
Routine testing of animals is not recommended at this time, and any tests done on animals are done on a case by case basis.
For example, if the pet of a COVID-19 patient has a new, concerning illness with symptoms similar to those of COVID-19, the animals veterinarian might consult with public health and animal health officials to determine if testing is needed.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
There is no reason to think that any animals, including shelter pets, play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
The first case of a wild animal testing positive for the virus in the United States was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
However, this tiger was in a captive zoo environment ,and public health officials believe the tiger became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected and spreading the virus.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal iconexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading.
Some people are worried about getting the disease from these people.
Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, toward people who live in certain parts of the world, people who have traveled internationally, people who were in quarantine, or healthcare professionals.
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
People can fight stigma by providing social support in situations where you notice this is occurring.
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient.
See resources on mental health and coping during COVID-19.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
CDCs COVID-19 case numbers include many publicly reported numbers, including information from state, local, territorial, international and external partners.
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in people and may different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people.
This occurred with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and now with the virus that causes COVID-19.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
All three of these viruses have their origins in bats.
The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initially posted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.
However, the exact source of this virus is unknown.
More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.
The number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The growing number of cases in part reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person.
People are thought to be most contagious when they are symptomatic (the sickest).
That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
More recently the virus has also been detected in asymptomatic persons.
How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made using a test-based or non-test-based strategy (i.e.
time since illness started and time since recovery) in consultation with state and local public health officials.
The decision involves considering the specifics of each situation, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and the results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Learn more about CDCs guidance on when to release someone from isolation and discharge hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
For information on when someone who has been sick with COVID-19 is able to stop home isolation see Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19.
Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease.
Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure.
For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure because the incubation period for this virus is 2 to 14 days.
Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets.
Currently, there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food.
Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds for general food safety.
Throughout the day use a tissue to cover your coughing or sneezing, and wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, like a packaging container, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging.
Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.
Based on information about this novel coronavirus thus far, it seems unlikely that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food – additional investigation is needed.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Generally coronaviruses survive for shorter periods at higher temperatures and higher humidity than in cooler or dryer environments.
However, we dont have direct data for this virus, nor do we have direct data for a temperature-based cutoff for inactivation at this point.
The necessary temperature would also be based on the materials of the surface, the environment, etc.
Regardless of temperature please follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfection.
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the risk assessment may change daily.
The latest updates are available on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) website.
COVID-19 case counts for the United States are updated regularly online.
See the current U.S. case count of COVID-19.
Visit the COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
There is information for people who have had close contact with a person confirmed to have, or being evaluated for, COVID-19 available online.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people must go into public settings (grocery stores, for example).
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
You can learn more about who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 at People who are at higher risk for severe illness.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at Prevention for 2019 Novel Coronavirus and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
More information on Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally presented with mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is much more to be learned about how the disease impacts children.
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a cloth face covering that covers their nose and mouth when they are out in the community.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the face covering without assistance.
Wearing cloth face coverings is a public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning ,and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical face masks and N95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare personnel and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
If appropriate, explain to them that most illness from COVID-19 seems to be mild.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
CDC offers resources to help talk with children about COVID-19.
This is a new virus and we are still learning about it, but so far, there does not seem to be a lot of illness in children.
Most illness, including serious illness, is happening in adults of working age and older adults.
However, children do get the virus and become ill.
Many schools across the country have announced dismissals for temporary periods.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Children with complex, chronic medical conditions, including children with physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional differences, can have special healthcare needs.
Its not known yet whether all of these children are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing cloth face coverings, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on ways to cope with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19:
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Practice everyday preventive actions to help reduce your risk of getting sick and remind everyone in your home to do the same.
These actions are especially important for older adults and people who have severe chronic medical conditions:
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Talk to the school or facility about their emergency operations plan.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
CDC recommends handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or, using alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available.
These actions are part of everyday preventive actions individuals can take to slow the spread of respiratory diseases like COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal iconexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidancepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
See FAQs about hand hygiene for healthcare personnel responding to COVID-2019.
During an outbreak, stay calm and put your preparedness plan to work.
Follow the steps below:
Put your household plan into action.
Depending on the situation, public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19, such as school dismissals.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or and watch for communication from your childs school.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Follow the advice of your local health officials.
Stay home if you can.
Talk to your employer to discuss working from home, taking leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
Employers should be aware that more employees may need to stay at home to care for sick children or other sick family members than is usual in case of a community outbreak.
CDC makes recommendations, shares information, and provides guidance to help slow down the spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. including guidance for schools and businesses.
CDC regularly shares information and provides assistance to state, local, territorial, and tribal health authorities.
These local authorities are responsible for making decisions including  stay at home or shelter in place.
What is included in these orders and how they are implemented are also decided by local authorities.
These decisions may also depend on many factors such as how the virus is spreading in a certain community.
Please contact your local health department to find out more.
CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
Employers, schools, and organizations may decide to visibly screen for symptoms or perform on-site symptom checks.
If your employer, school, or organization requires you to present documentation regarding COVID-19 before returning to work or school (for example, proof of a negative COVID-19 lab test, if a test was performed, contact your healthcare provider to ask if he or she would be able to provide a form of documentation for you.
Documentation of self-isolation and self-quarantine may not be possible.
CDC has guidance for when and how people with COVID-19 can discontinue home isolation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html.
CDC also has guidance for what people should do if they think they have been exposed or feel sick: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Current symptoms reported for patients with COVID-19 have included mild to severe respiratory illness with fever1, cough, and difficulty breathing.
Read about COVID-19 Symptoms.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
For information about testing, see Testing for COVID-19.
The process and locations for testing vary from place to place.
Contact your state, local, tribal, or territorial department for more information, or reach out to a medical provider.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC while medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find someplace to get tested.
See Testing for COVID-19 for more information.
Using the CDC-developed diagnostic test, a negative result means that the virus that causes COVID-19 was not found in the persons sample.
In the early stages of infection, it is possible the virus will not be detected.
For COVID-19, a negative test result for a sample collected while a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID-19 virus is not causing their current illness.
There are actually many tests being used to diagnose COVID-19 that the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
All of these diagnostic tests identify the virus in samples from the respiratory system, such as from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs.
Some tests are conducted at the testing site you visit, and results are available to you within minutes.
Other tests must be sent to a laboratory to analyze, a process that takes 1-2 days once the lab receives your samples.
Locations and types of testing sites vary depending on where you live (see question: Where can I get tested).
Check with your testing site to learn which test it uses.
You can find a patient information sheet about each test on the FDA websiteexternal icon.
In the coming weeks, healthcare providers in most states will begin offering home collection kits, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
A healthcare provider will need to give you the approved kit – the Pixel by LabCorp COVID-19 test home collection kit.
You will be able to collect your sample (a nasal swab) at home and then send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
For more information please see FDAs most recent press releaseexternal icon.
Serology testing checks a sample of a persons blood to look for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
These antibodies are produced when someone has been infected, so a positive result from this test indicates that person was previously infected with the virus.
CDC is working with other federal agencies to evaluate the performance of commercially manufactured serology tests that are becoming increasingly available from healthcare providers.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
We do not know yet if the antibodies that result from infection with SARS-CoV-2 can protect someone from reinfection with this virus or how long antibodies to the virus will protect someone.
Scientists are conducting research to answer those questions.
Serology tests may not be able to tell you if you are currently infected because it typically takes 1 to 2 weeks to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
To tell if you are currently infected, you would need a test that identifies the virus in samples from your upper respiratory system, such as a nasopharyngeal swab.
CDC and partners are investigating to determine if you can get sick with COVID-19 more than once.
At this time, we are not sure if you can become re-infected.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
If you are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, you should:
If there is an outbreak in your community, stay home as much as possible.
Watch for symptoms and emergency signs.
If you get sick, stay home and call your doctor.
More information on how to prepare, what to do if you get sick, and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on People at Risk for Serious Illness from COVID-19.
As CDC gets more information about COVID-19 cases here in the United States, we will update this list as needed.
Currently, there is no evidence to show that taking ibuprofen or naproxen can lead to a more severe infection of COVID-19.
People with high blood pressure should take their blood pressure medications, as directed, and work with their healthcare provider to make sure that their blood pressure is as well controlled as possible.
Any changes to your medications should only be made by your healthcare provider.
Based on available information, adults aged 65 years and older and people of any age with underlying medical conditions included on this list are at higher risk for severe illness and poorer outcomes from COVID-19.
CDC is collecting and analyzing data regularly and will update the list when we learn more.
People with underlying medical conditions not on the list might also be at higher risk and should consult with their healthcare provider if they are concerned.
We encourage all people, regardless of risk, to:
Generally, well-controlled means that your condition is stable, not life-threatening, and laboratory assessments and other findings are as similar as possible to those without the health condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Severity typically means how much impact the illness or condition has on your bodys function.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control, including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigation, see Information for Healthcare Professionals.
For information on specimen collection and shipment, see Information for Laboratories.
For information for public health professional on COVID-19, see Information for Public Health Professionals.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread from close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) with a person who is currently sick with COVID-19.
The virus likely spreads primarily through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, similar to how influenza and other respiratory infections spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N-95 respirator).
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
After removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
A funeral or visitation service can be held for a person who has died of COVID-19.
Funeral home workers should follow their routine infection prevention and control precautions when handling a decedent who died of COVID-19.
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
For transporting a body after the body has been bagged, disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Embalming can be conducted.
During embalming, follow Standard Precautions including the use of additional PPE if splashing is expected (e.g.
disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N95 respirator).
Wear appropriate respiratory protection if any procedures will generate aerosols or if required for chemicals used in accordance with the manufacturers label.
Wear heavy-duty gloves over nitrile disposable gloves if there is a risk of cuts, puncture wounds, or other injuries that break the skin.
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
After cleaning and removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water is not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
Decedents with COVID-19 can be buried or cremated, but check for any additional state and local requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the remains of individuals who have died of certain infectious diseases.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
CDC is working with other federal partners in a whole-of-government response.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes available.
CDC works 24/7 to protect peoples health.
More information about CDCs response to COVID-19 is available online.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
A small number of pets have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after contact with people with COVID-19.
Pets have other types of coronaviruses that can make them sick, like canine and feline coronaviruses.
These other coronaviruses cannot infect people and are not related to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
No.
At this time, routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Until we learn more about this new coronavirus, you should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would with people.
When possible, have another member of your household care for your animals while you are sick.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a cloth face covering.
We dont know for sure which animals can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
A tiger at a zoo in New York has also tested positive for the virus.
Recent research shows that ferrets, cats, and golden Syrian hamsters can be experimentally infected with the virus and can spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Pigs, chickens, and ducks did not become infected or spread the infection based on results from these studies.
Data from one study suggested dogs are not as likely to become infected with the virus as cats and ferrets.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus that causes COVID-19 and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus and how it spreads, but it appears it can spread from humans to animals in some situations.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Most of these animals had contact with a person with COVID-19.
A tiger at a New York zoo has also tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person, typically through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
People sick with COVID-19 should isolate themselves from other people and animals, including pets, during their illness until we know more about how this virus affects animals.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a cloth face covering and wash your hands before and after you interact with pets.
Walking a dog is important for both animal and human health and well-being.
Walk dogs on a leash, maintaining at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other people and animals, do not gather in groups, and stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings.
Do not go to dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather.
To help maintain social distancing, do not let other people pet your dog when you are out for a walk.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Animals are only being tested in very rare circumstances.
Routine testing of animals is not recommended at this time, and any tests done on animals are done on a case by case basis.
For example, if the pet of a COVID-19 patient has a new, concerning illness with symptoms similar to those of COVID-19, the animals veterinarian might consult with public health and animal health officials to determine if testing is needed.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
There is no reason to think that any animals, including shelter pets, play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
The first case of a wild animal testing positive for the virus in the United States was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
However, this tiger was in a captive zoo environment ,and public health officials believe the tiger became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected and spreading the virus.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal iconexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading.
Some people are worried about getting the disease from these people.
Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, toward people who live in certain parts of the world, people who have traveled internationally, people who were in quarantine, or healthcare professionals.
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
People can fight stigma by providing social support in situations where you notice this is occurring.
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient.
See resources on mental health and coping during COVID-19.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
CDCs COVID-19 case numbers include many publicly reported numbers, including information from state, local, territorial, international and external partners.
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in people and may different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people.
This occurred with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and now with the virus that causes COVID-19.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
All three of these viruses have their origins in bats.
The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initially posted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.
However, the exact source of this virus is unknown.
More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.
The number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The growing number of cases in part reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person.
People are thought to be most contagious when they are symptomatic (the sickest).
That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
More recently the virus has also been detected in asymptomatic persons.
How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made using a test-based or non-test-based strategy (i.e.
time since illness started and time since recovery) in consultation with state and local public health officials.
The decision involves considering the specifics of each situation, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and the results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Learn more about CDCs guidance on when to release someone from isolation and discharge hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
For information on when someone who has been sick with COVID-19 is able to stop home isolation see Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19.
Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease.
Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure.
For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure because the incubation period for this virus is 2 to 14 days.
Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets.
Currently, there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food.
Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds for general food safety.
Throughout the day use a tissue to cover your coughing or sneezing, and wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, like a packaging container, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging.
Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.
Based on information about this novel coronavirus thus far, it seems unlikely that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food – additional investigation is needed.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Generally coronaviruses survive for shorter periods at higher temperatures and higher humidity than in cooler or dryer environments.
However, we dont have direct data for this virus, nor do we have direct data for a temperature-based cutoff for inactivation at this point.
The necessary temperature would also be based on the materials of the surface, the environment, etc.
Regardless of temperature please follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfection.
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the risk assessment may change daily.
The latest updates are available on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) website.
COVID-19 case counts for the United States are updated regularly online.
See the current U.S. case count of COVID-19.
Visit the COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
There is information for people who have had close contact with a person confirmed to have, or being evaluated for, COVID-19 available online.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people must go into public settings (grocery stores, for example).
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
You can learn more about who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 at People who are at higher risk for severe illness.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at Prevention for 2019 Novel Coronavirus and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
More information on Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally presented with mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is much more to be learned about how the disease impacts children.
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a cloth face covering that covers their nose and mouth when they are out in the community.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the face covering without assistance.
Wearing cloth face coverings is a public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning ,and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical face masks and N95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare personnel and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
If appropriate, explain to them that most illness from COVID-19 seems to be mild.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
CDC offers resources to help talk with children about COVID-19.
This is a new virus and we are still learning about it, but so far, there does not seem to be a lot of illness in children.
Most illness, including serious illness, is happening in adults of working age and older adults.
However, children do get the virus and become ill.
Many schools across the country have announced dismissals for temporary periods.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Children with complex, chronic medical conditions, including children with physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional differences, can have special healthcare needs.
Its not known yet whether all of these children are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing cloth face coverings, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on ways to cope with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19:
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Practice everyday preventive actions to help reduce your risk of getting sick and remind everyone in your home to do the same.
These actions are especially important for older adults and people who have severe chronic medical conditions:
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Talk to the school or facility about their emergency operations plan.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
CDC recommends handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or, using alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available.
These actions are part of everyday preventive actions individuals can take to slow the spread of respiratory diseases like COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal iconexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidancepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
See FAQs about hand hygiene for healthcare personnel responding to COVID-2019.
During an outbreak, stay calm and put your preparedness plan to work.
Follow the steps below:
Put your household plan into action.
Depending on the situation, public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19, such as school dismissals.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or and watch for communication from your childs school.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Follow the advice of your local health officials.
Stay home if you can.
Talk to your employer to discuss working from home, taking leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
Employers should be aware that more employees may need to stay at home to care for sick children or other sick family members than is usual in case of a community outbreak.
CDC makes recommendations, shares information, and provides guidance to help slow down the spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. including guidance for schools and businesses.
CDC regularly shares information and provides assistance to state, local, territorial, and tribal health authorities.
These local authorities are responsible for making decisions including  stay at home or shelter in place.
What is included in these orders and how they are implemented are also decided by local authorities.
These decisions may also depend on many factors such as how the virus is spreading in a certain community.
Please contact your local health department to find out more.
CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
Employers, schools, and organizations may decide to visibly screen for symptoms or perform on-site symptom checks.
If your employer, school, or organization requires you to present documentation regarding COVID-19 before returning to work or school (for example, proof of a negative COVID-19 lab test, if a test was performed, contact your healthcare provider to ask if he or she would be able to provide a form of documentation for you.
Documentation of self-isolation and self-quarantine may not be possible.
CDC has guidance for when and how people with COVID-19 can discontinue home isolation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html.
CDC also has guidance for what people should do if they think they have been exposed or feel sick: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Current symptoms reported for patients with COVID-19 have included mild to severe respiratory illness with fever1, cough, and difficulty breathing.
Read about COVID-19 Symptoms.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
For information about testing, see Testing for COVID-19.
The process and locations for testing vary from place to place.
Contact your state, local, tribal, or territorial department for more information, or reach out to a medical provider.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC while medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find someplace to get tested.
See Testing for COVID-19 for more information.
Using the CDC-developed diagnostic test, a negative result means that the virus that causes COVID-19 was not found in the persons sample.
In the early stages of infection, it is possible the virus will not be detected.
For COVID-19, a negative test result for a sample collected while a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID-19 virus is not causing their current illness.
There are actually many tests being used to diagnose COVID-19 that the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
All of these diagnostic tests identify the virus in samples from the respiratory system, such as from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs.
Some tests are conducted at the testing site you visit, and results are available to you within minutes.
Other tests must be sent to a laboratory to analyze, a process that takes 1-2 days once the lab receives your samples.
Locations and types of testing sites vary depending on where you live (see question: Where can I get tested).
Check with your testing site to learn which test it uses.
You can find a patient information sheet about each test on the FDA websiteexternal icon.
In the coming weeks, healthcare providers in most states will begin offering home collection kits, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
A healthcare provider will need to give you the approved kit – the Pixel by LabCorp COVID-19 test home collection kit.
You will be able to collect your sample (a nasal swab) at home and then send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
For more information please see FDAs most recent press releaseexternal icon.
Serology testing checks a sample of a persons blood to look for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
These antibodies are produced when someone has been infected, so a positive result from this test indicates that person was previously infected with the virus.
CDC is working with other federal agencies to evaluate the performance of commercially manufactured serology tests that are becoming increasingly available from healthcare providers.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
We do not know yet if the antibodies that result from infection with SARS-CoV-2 can protect someone from reinfection with this virus or how long antibodies to the virus will protect someone.
Scientists are conducting research to answer those questions.
Serology tests may not be able to tell you if you are currently infected because it typically takes 1 to 2 weeks to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
To tell if you are currently infected, you would need a test that identifies the virus in samples from your upper respiratory system, such as a nasopharyngeal swab.
CDC and partners are investigating to determine if you can get sick with COVID-19 more than once.
At this time, we are not sure if you can become re-infected.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
If you are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, you should:
If there is an outbreak in your community, stay home as much as possible.
Watch for symptoms and emergency signs.
If you get sick, stay home and call your doctor.
More information on how to prepare, what to do if you get sick, and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on People at Risk for Serious Illness from COVID-19.
As CDC gets more information about COVID-19 cases here in the United States, we will update this list as needed.
Currently, there is no evidence to show that taking ibuprofen or naproxen can lead to a more severe infection of COVID-19.
People with high blood pressure should take their blood pressure medications, as directed, and work with their healthcare provider to make sure that their blood pressure is as well controlled as possible.
Any changes to your medications should only be made by your healthcare provider.
Based on available information, adults aged 65 years and older and people of any age with underlying medical conditions included on this list are at higher risk for severe illness and poorer outcomes from COVID-19.
CDC is collecting and analyzing data regularly and will update the list when we learn more.
People with underlying medical conditions not on the list might also be at higher risk and should consult with their healthcare provider if they are concerned.
We encourage all people, regardless of risk, to:
Generally, well-controlled means that your condition is stable, not life-threatening, and laboratory assessments and other findings are as similar as possible to those without the health condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Severity typically means how much impact the illness or condition has on your bodys function.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control, including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigation, see Information for Healthcare Professionals.
For information on specimen collection and shipment, see Information for Laboratories.
For information for public health professional on COVID-19, see Information for Public Health Professionals.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread from close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) with a person who is currently sick with COVID-19.
The virus likely spreads primarily through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, similar to how influenza and other respiratory infections spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N-95 respirator).
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
After removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
A funeral or visitation service can be held for a person who has died of COVID-19.
Funeral home workers should follow their routine infection prevention and control precautions when handling a decedent who died of COVID-19.
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
For transporting a body after the body has been bagged, disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Embalming can be conducted.
During embalming, follow Standard Precautions including the use of additional PPE if splashing is expected (e.g.
disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N95 respirator).
Wear appropriate respiratory protection if any procedures will generate aerosols or if required for chemicals used in accordance with the manufacturers label.
Wear heavy-duty gloves over nitrile disposable gloves if there is a risk of cuts, puncture wounds, or other injuries that break the skin.
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
After cleaning and removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water is not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
Decedents with COVID-19 can be buried or cremated, but check for any additional state and local requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the remains of individuals who have died of certain infectious diseases.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
CDC is working with other federal partners in a whole-of-government response.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes available.
CDC works 24/7 to protect peoples health.
More information about CDCs response to COVID-19 is available online.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
A small number of pets have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after contact with people with COVID-19.
Pets have other types of coronaviruses that can make them sick, like canine and feline coronaviruses.
These other coronaviruses cannot infect people and are not related to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
No.
At this time, routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Until we learn more about this new coronavirus, you should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would with people.
When possible, have another member of your household care for your animals while you are sick.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a cloth face covering.
We dont know for sure which animals can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
A tiger at a zoo in New York has also tested positive for the virus.
Recent research shows that ferrets, cats, and golden Syrian hamsters can be experimentally infected with the virus and can spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Pigs, chickens, and ducks did not become infected or spread the infection based on results from these studies.
Data from one study suggested dogs are not as likely to become infected with the virus as cats and ferrets.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus that causes COVID-19 and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus and how it spreads, but it appears it can spread from humans to animals in some situations.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Most of these animals had contact with a person with COVID-19.
A tiger at a New York zoo has also tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person, typically through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
People sick with COVID-19 should isolate themselves from other people and animals, including pets, during their illness until we know more about how this virus affects animals.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a cloth face covering and wash your hands before and after you interact with pets.
Walking a dog is important for both animal and human health and well-being.
Walk dogs on a leash, maintaining at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other people and animals, do not gather in groups, and stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings.
Do not go to dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather.
To help maintain social distancing, do not let other people pet your dog when you are out for a walk.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Animals are only being tested in very rare circumstances.
Routine testing of animals is not recommended at this time, and any tests done on animals are done on a case by case basis.
For example, if the pet of a COVID-19 patient has a new, concerning illness with symptoms similar to those of COVID-19, the animals veterinarian might consult with public health and animal health officials to determine if testing is needed.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
There is no reason to think that any animals, including shelter pets, play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
The first case of a wild animal testing positive for the virus in the United States was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
However, this tiger was in a captive zoo environment ,and public health officials believe the tiger became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected and spreading the virus.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal iconexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading.
Some people are worried about getting the disease from these people.
Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, toward people who live in certain parts of the world, people who have traveled internationally, people who were in quarantine, or healthcare professionals.
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
People can fight stigma by providing social support in situations where you notice this is occurring.
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient.
See resources on mental health and coping during COVID-19.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
CDCs COVID-19 case numbers include many publicly reported numbers, including information from state, local, territorial, international and external partners.
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in people and may different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people.
This occurred with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and now with the virus that causes COVID-19.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
All three of these viruses have their origins in bats.
The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initially posted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.
However, the exact source of this virus is unknown.
More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.
The number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The growing number of cases in part reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person.
People are thought to be most contagious when they are symptomatic (the sickest).
That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
More recently the virus has also been detected in asymptomatic persons.
How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made using a test-based or non-test-based strategy (i.e.
time since illness started and time since recovery) in consultation with state and local public health officials.
The decision involves considering the specifics of each situation, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and the results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Learn more about CDCs guidance on when to release someone from isolation and discharge hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
For information on when someone who has been sick with COVID-19 is able to stop home isolation see Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19.
Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease.
Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure.
For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure because the incubation period for this virus is 2 to 14 days.
Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets.
Currently, there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food.
Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds for general food safety.
Throughout the day use a tissue to cover your coughing or sneezing, and wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, like a packaging container, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging.
Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.
Based on information about this novel coronavirus thus far, it seems unlikely that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food – additional investigation is needed.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Generally coronaviruses survive for shorter periods at higher temperatures and higher humidity than in cooler or dryer environments.
However, we dont have direct data for this virus, nor do we have direct data for a temperature-based cutoff for inactivation at this point.
The necessary temperature would also be based on the materials of the surface, the environment, etc.
Regardless of temperature please follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfection.
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the risk assessment may change daily.
The latest updates are available on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) website.
COVID-19 case counts for the United States are updated regularly online.
See the current U.S. case count of COVID-19.
Visit the COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
There is information for people who have had close contact with a person confirmed to have, or being evaluated for, COVID-19 available online.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people must go into public settings (grocery stores, for example).
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
You can learn more about who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 at People who are at higher risk for severe illness.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at Prevention for 2019 Novel Coronavirus and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
More information on Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally presented with mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is much more to be learned about how the disease impacts children.
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a cloth face covering that covers their nose and mouth when they are out in the community.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the face covering without assistance.
Wearing cloth face coverings is a public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning ,and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical face masks and N95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare personnel and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
If appropriate, explain to them that most illness from COVID-19 seems to be mild.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
CDC offers resources to help talk with children about COVID-19.
This is a new virus and we are still learning about it, but so far, there does not seem to be a lot of illness in children.
Most illness, including serious illness, is happening in adults of working age and older adults.
However, children do get the virus and become ill.
Many schools across the country have announced dismissals for temporary periods.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Children with complex, chronic medical conditions, including children with physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional differences, can have special healthcare needs.
Its not known yet whether all of these children are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing cloth face coverings, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on ways to cope with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19:
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Practice everyday preventive actions to help reduce your risk of getting sick and remind everyone in your home to do the same.
These actions are especially important for older adults and people who have severe chronic medical conditions:
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Talk to the school or facility about their emergency operations plan.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
CDC recommends handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or, using alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available.
These actions are part of everyday preventive actions individuals can take to slow the spread of respiratory diseases like COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal iconexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidancepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
See FAQs about hand hygiene for healthcare personnel responding to COVID-2019.
During an outbreak, stay calm and put your preparedness plan to work.
Follow the steps below:
Put your household plan into action.
Depending on the situation, public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19, such as school dismissals.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or and watch for communication from your childs school.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Follow the advice of your local health officials.
Stay home if you can.
Talk to your employer to discuss working from home, taking leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
Employers should be aware that more employees may need to stay at home to care for sick children or other sick family members than is usual in case of a community outbreak.
CDC makes recommendations, shares information, and provides guidance to help slow down the spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. including guidance for schools and businesses.
CDC regularly shares information and provides assistance to state, local, territorial, and tribal health authorities.
These local authorities are responsible for making decisions including  stay at home or shelter in place.
What is included in these orders and how they are implemented are also decided by local authorities.
These decisions may also depend on many factors such as how the virus is spreading in a certain community.
Please contact your local health department to find out more.
CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
Employers, schools, and organizations may decide to visibly screen for symptoms or perform on-site symptom checks.
If your employer, school, or organization requires you to present documentation regarding COVID-19 before returning to work or school (for example, proof of a negative COVID-19 lab test, if a test was performed, contact your healthcare provider to ask if he or she would be able to provide a form of documentation for you.
Documentation of self-isolation and self-quarantine may not be possible.
CDC has guidance for when and how people with COVID-19 can discontinue home isolation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html.
CDC also has guidance for what people should do if they think they have been exposed or feel sick: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Current symptoms reported for patients with COVID-19 have included mild to severe respiratory illness with fever1, cough, and difficulty breathing.
Read about COVID-19 Symptoms.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
For information about testing, see Testing for COVID-19.
The process and locations for testing vary from place to place.
Contact your state, local, tribal, or territorial department for more information, or reach out to a medical provider.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC while medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find someplace to get tested.
See Testing for COVID-19 for more information.
Using the CDC-developed diagnostic test, a negative result means that the virus that causes COVID-19 was not found in the persons sample.
In the early stages of infection, it is possible the virus will not be detected.
For COVID-19, a negative test result for a sample collected while a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID-19 virus is not causing their current illness.
There are actually many tests being used to diagnose COVID-19 that the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
All of these diagnostic tests identify the virus in samples from the respiratory system, such as from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs.
Some tests are conducted at the testing site you visit, and results are available to you within minutes.
Other tests must be sent to a laboratory to analyze, a process that takes 1-2 days once the lab receives your samples.
Locations and types of testing sites vary depending on where you live (see question: Where can I get tested).
Check with your testing site to learn which test it uses.
You can find a patient information sheet about each test on the FDA websiteexternal icon.
In the coming weeks, healthcare providers in most states will begin offering home collection kits, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
A healthcare provider will need to give you the approved kit – the Pixel by LabCorp COVID-19 test home collection kit.
You will be able to collect your sample (a nasal swab) at home and then send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
For more information please see FDAs most recent press releaseexternal icon.
Serology testing checks a sample of a persons blood to look for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
These antibodies are produced when someone has been infected, so a positive result from this test indicates that person was previously infected with the virus.
CDC is working with other federal agencies to evaluate the performance of commercially manufactured serology tests that are becoming increasingly available from healthcare providers.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
We do not know yet if the antibodies that result from infection with SARS-CoV-2 can protect someone from reinfection with this virus or how long antibodies to the virus will protect someone.
Scientists are conducting research to answer those questions.
Serology tests may not be able to tell you if you are currently infected because it typically takes 1 to 2 weeks to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
To tell if you are currently infected, you would need a test that identifies the virus in samples from your upper respiratory system, such as a nasopharyngeal swab.
CDC and partners are investigating to determine if you can get sick with COVID-19 more than once.
At this time, we are not sure if you can become re-infected.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
If you are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, you should:
If there is an outbreak in your community, stay home as much as possible.
Watch for symptoms and emergency signs.
If you get sick, stay home and call your doctor.
More information on how to prepare, what to do if you get sick, and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on People at Risk for Serious Illness from COVID-19.
As CDC gets more information about COVID-19 cases here in the United States, we will update this list as needed.
Currently, there is no evidence to show that taking ibuprofen or naproxen can lead to a more severe infection of COVID-19.
People with high blood pressure should take their blood pressure medications, as directed, and work with their healthcare provider to make sure that their blood pressure is as well controlled as possible.
Any changes to your medications should only be made by your healthcare provider.
Based on available information, adults aged 65 years and older and people of any age with underlying medical conditions included on this list are at higher risk for severe illness and poorer outcomes from COVID-19.
CDC is collecting and analyzing data regularly and will update the list when we learn more.
People with underlying medical conditions not on the list might also be at higher risk and should consult with their healthcare provider if they are concerned.
We encourage all people, regardless of risk, to:
Generally, well-controlled means that your condition is stable, not life-threatening, and laboratory assessments and other findings are as similar as possible to those without the health condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Severity typically means how much impact the illness or condition has on your bodys function.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control, including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigation, see Information for Healthcare Professionals.
For information on specimen collection and shipment, see Information for Laboratories.
For information for public health professional on COVID-19, see Information for Public Health Professionals.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread from close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) with a person who is currently sick with COVID-19.
The virus likely spreads primarily through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, similar to how influenza and other respiratory infections spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N-95 respirator).
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
After removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
A funeral or visitation service can be held for a person who has died of COVID-19.
Funeral home workers should follow their routine infection prevention and control precautions when handling a decedent who died of COVID-19.
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
For transporting a body after the body has been bagged, disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Embalming can be conducted.
During embalming, follow Standard Precautions including the use of additional PPE if splashing is expected (e.g.
disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N95 respirator).
Wear appropriate respiratory protection if any procedures will generate aerosols or if required for chemicals used in accordance with the manufacturers label.
Wear heavy-duty gloves over nitrile disposable gloves if there is a risk of cuts, puncture wounds, or other injuries that break the skin.
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
After cleaning and removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water is not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
Decedents with COVID-19 can be buried or cremated, but check for any additional state and local requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the remains of individuals who have died of certain infectious diseases.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
CDC is working with other federal partners in a whole-of-government response.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes available.
CDC works 24/7 to protect peoples health.
More information about CDCs response to COVID-19 is available online.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
A small number of pets have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after contact with people with COVID-19.
Pets have other types of coronaviruses that can make them sick, like canine and feline coronaviruses.
These other coronaviruses cannot infect people and are not related to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
No.
At this time, routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Until we learn more about this new coronavirus, you should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would with people.
When possible, have another member of your household care for your animals while you are sick.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a cloth face covering.
We dont know for sure which animals can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
A tiger at a zoo in New York has also tested positive for the virus.
Recent research shows that ferrets, cats, and golden Syrian hamsters can be experimentally infected with the virus and can spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Pigs, chickens, and ducks did not become infected or spread the infection based on results from these studies.
Data from one study suggested dogs are not as likely to become infected with the virus as cats and ferrets.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus that causes COVID-19 and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus and how it spreads, but it appears it can spread from humans to animals in some situations.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Most of these animals had contact with a person with COVID-19.
A tiger at a New York zoo has also tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person, typically through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
People sick with COVID-19 should isolate themselves from other people and animals, including pets, during their illness until we know more about how this virus affects animals.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a cloth face covering and wash your hands before and after you interact with pets.
Walking a dog is important for both animal and human health and well-being.
Walk dogs on a leash, maintaining at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other people and animals, do not gather in groups, and stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings.
Do not go to dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather.
To help maintain social distancing, do not let other people pet your dog when you are out for a walk.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Animals are only being tested in very rare circumstances.
Routine testing of animals is not recommended at this time, and any tests done on animals are done on a case by case basis.
For example, if the pet of a COVID-19 patient has a new, concerning illness with symptoms similar to those of COVID-19, the animals veterinarian might consult with public health and animal health officials to determine if testing is needed.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
There is no reason to think that any animals, including shelter pets, play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
The first case of a wild animal testing positive for the virus in the United States was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
However, this tiger was in a captive zoo environment ,and public health officials believe the tiger became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected and spreading the virus.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
Help control the spread of rumors and be aware of fraud schemes.
A novel coronavirus is a new coronavirus that has not been previously identified.
The virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is not the same as the coronaviruses that commonly circulate among humans and cause mild illness, like the common cold.
A diagnosis with coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43, or HKU1 is not the same as a COVID-19 diagnosis.
Patients with COVID-19 will be evaluated and cared for differently than patients with common coronavirus diagnosis.
On February 11, 2020 the World Health Organization announced an official name for the disease that is causing the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak, first identified in Wuhan China.
The new name of this disease is coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated as COVID-19.
In COVID-19, ‘CO stands for ‘corona, ‘VI for ‘virus, and ‘D for disease.
Formerly, this disease was referred to as 2019 novel coronavirus or 2019-nCoV.
There are many types of human coronaviruses including some that commonly cause mild upper-respiratory tract illnesses.
COVID-19 is a new disease, caused be a novel (or new) coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans.
The name of this disease was selected following the World Health Organization (WHO) best practiceexternal iconexternal icon for naming of new human infectious diseases.
People in the U.S. may be worried or anxious about friends and relatives who are living in or visiting areas where COVID-19 is spreading.
Some people are worried about getting the disease from these people.
Fear and anxiety can lead to social stigma, for example, toward people who live in certain parts of the world, people who have traveled internationally, people who were in quarantine, or healthcare professionals.
Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation.
Stigma is associated with a lack of knowledge about how COVID-19 spreads, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and gossip that spreads rumors and myths.
Stigma hurts everyone by creating more fear or anger toward ordinary people instead of focusing on the disease that is causing the problem.
People can fight stigma by providing social support in situations where you notice this is occurring.
Stigma affects the emotional or mental health of stigmatized groups and the communities they live in.
Stopping stigma is important to making communities and community members resilient.
See resources on mental health and coping during COVID-19.
Everyone can help stop stigma related to COVID-19 by knowing the facts and sharing them with others in your community.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
CDCs COVID-19 case numbers include many publicly reported numbers, including information from state, local, territorial, international and external partners.
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
COVID-19 is caused by a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in people and may different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people.
This occurred with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, and now with the virus that causes COVID-19.
The SARS-CoV-2 virus is a betacoronavirus, like MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
All three of these viruses have their origins in bats.
The sequences from U.S. patients are similar to the one that China initially posted, suggesting a likely single, recent emergence of this virus from an animal reservoir.
However, the exact source of this virus is unknown.
More information about the source and spread of COVID-19 is available on the Situation Summary: Source and Spread of the Virus.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly from person to person, mainly through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Spread is more likely when people are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet).
COVID-19 seems to be spreading easily and sustainably in the community (community spread) in many affected geographic areas.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Learn what is known about the spread of newly emerged coronaviruses.
The number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
The growing number of cases in part reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is spreading from person-to-person.
People are thought to be most contagious when they are symptomatic (the sickest).
That is why CDC recommends that these patients be isolated either in the hospital or at home (depending on how sick they are) until they are better and no longer pose a risk of infecting others.
More recently the virus has also been detected in asymptomatic persons.
How long someone is actively sick can vary so the decision on when to release someone from isolation is made using a test-based or non-test-based strategy (i.e.
time since illness started and time since recovery) in consultation with state and local public health officials.
The decision involves considering the specifics of each situation, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and the results of laboratory testing for that patient.
Learn more about CDCs guidance on when to release someone from isolation and discharge hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
For information on when someone who has been sick with COVID-19 is able to stop home isolation see Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19.
Someone who has been released from isolation is not considered to pose a risk of infection to others.
Quarantine means separating a person or group of people who have been exposed to a contagious disease but have not developed illness (symptoms) from others who have not been exposed, in order to prevent the possible spread of that disease.
Quarantine is usually established for the incubation period of the communicable disease, which is the span of time during which people have developed illness after exposure.
For COVID-19, the period of quarantine is 14 days from the last date of exposure because the incubation period for this virus is 2 to 14 days.
Someone who has been released from COVID-19 quarantine is not considered a risk for spreading the virus to others because they have not developed illness during the incubation period.
Coronaviruses are generally thought to be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets.
Currently, there is no evidence to support transmission of COVID-19 associated with food.
Before preparing or eating food it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds for general food safety.
Throughout the day use a tissue to cover your coughing or sneezing, and wash your hands after blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing, or going to the bathroom.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, like a packaging container, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
In general, because of poor survivability of these coronaviruses on surfaces, there is likely very low risk of spread from food products or packaging.
Learn what is known about the spread of COVID-19.
Based on information about this novel coronavirus thus far, it seems unlikely that COVID-19 can be transmitted through food – additional investigation is needed.
It is not yet known whether weather and temperature affect the spread of COVID-19.
Some other viruses, like those that cause the common cold and flu, spread more during cold weather months but that does not mean it is impossible to become sick with these viruses during other months.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Community spread means people have been infected with the virus in an area, including some who are not sure how or where they became infected.
Generally coronaviruses survive for shorter periods at higher temperatures and higher humidity than in cooler or dryer environments.
However, we dont have direct data for this virus, nor do we have direct data for a temperature-based cutoff for inactivation at this point.
The necessary temperature would also be based on the materials of the surface, the environment, etc.
Regardless of temperature please follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfection.
At this time, CDC has no data to suggest that this new coronavirus or other similar coronaviruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.
The main way that COVID-19 spreads is from person to person.
See How Coronavirus Spreads for more information.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and the risk assessment may change daily.
The latest updates are available on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) website.
COVID-19 case counts for the United States are updated regularly online.
See the current U.S. case count of COVID-19.
Visit the COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment page to learn about how to protect yourself from respiratory illnesses, like COVID-19.
There is information for people who have had close contact with a person confirmed to have, or being evaluated for, COVID-19 available online.
In light of new data about how COVID-19 spreads, along with evidence of widespread COVID-19 illness in communities across the country, CDC recommends that people wear a cloth face covering to cover their nose and mouth in the community setting.
This is an additional public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer, but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important in the event that someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
A cloth face covering should be worn whenever people must go into public settings (grocery stores, for example).
Medical masks and N-95 respirators are reserved for healthcare workers and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
There is still a lot that is unknown about COVID-19 and how it spreads.
Coronaviruses are thought to be spread most often by respiratory droplets.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from domestic or international mail, products or packaging.
However, it may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Learn more about safe handling of deliveries and mail.
In healthcare settings across the United States, donated blood is a lifesaving, essential part of caring for patients.
The need for donated blood is constant, and blood centers are open and in urgent need of donations.
CDC encourages people who are well to continue to donate blood if they are able, even if they are practicing social distancing because of COVID-19.
CDC is supporting blood centers by providing recommendations that will keep donors and staff safe.
Examples of these recommendations include spacing donor chairs 6 feet apart, thoroughly adhering to environmental cleaning practices, and encouraging donors to make donation appointments ahead of time.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Find more information about how coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself.
Visit CDCs contact lens website for more information on healthy contact lens wear and care.
Based on available evidence, children do not appear to be at higher risk for COVID-19 than adults.
While some children and infants have been sick with COVID-19, adults make up most of the known cases to date.
You can learn more about who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 at People who are at higher risk for severe illness.
You can encourage your child to help stop the spread of COVID-19 by teaching them to do the same things everyone should do to stay healthy.
You can find additional information on preventing COVID-19 at Prevention for 2019 Novel Coronavirus and at Preventing COVID-19 Spread in Communities.
More information on Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is available online.
No.
The symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in children and adults.
However, children with confirmed COVID-19 have generally presented with mild symptoms.
Reported symptoms in children include cold-like symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, and cough.
Vomiting and diarrhea have also been reported.
Its not known yet whether some children may be at higher risk for severe illness, for example, children with underlying medical conditions and special healthcare needs.
There is much more to be learned about how the disease impacts children.
CDC recommends that everyone 2 years and older wear a cloth face covering that covers their nose and mouth when they are out in the community.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be put on babies or children younger than 2 because of the danger of suffocation.
Children younger than 2 years of age are listed as an exception as well as anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the face covering without assistance.
Wearing cloth face coverings is a public health measure people should take to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in addition to (not instead of) social distancing, frequent hand cleaning ,and other everyday preventive actions.
A cloth face covering is not intended to protect the wearer but may prevent the spread of virus from the wearer to others.
This would be especially important if someone is infected but does not have symptoms.
Medical face masks and N95 respirators are still reserved for healthcare personnel and other first responders, as recommended by current CDC guidance.
Outbreaks can be stressful for adults and children.
Talk with your children about the outbreak, try to stay calm, and reassure them that they are safe.
If appropriate, explain to them that most illness from COVID-19 seems to be mild.
Children respond differently to stressful situations than adults.
CDC offers resources to help talk with children about COVID-19.
This is a new virus and we are still learning about it, but so far, there does not seem to be a lot of illness in children.
Most illness, including serious illness, is happening in adults of working age and older adults.
However, children do get the virus and become ill.
Many schools across the country have announced dismissals for temporary periods.
Keep track of school dismissals in your community.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, use alternative childcare arrangements, if needed.
If your child/children become sick with COVID-19, notify their childcare facility or school.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community.
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during the school dismissal.
Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of getting sick from COVID-19.
Children with complex, chronic medical conditions, including children with physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional differences, can have special healthcare needs.
Its not known yet whether all of these children are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Although most COVID-19 cases in children are not severe, serious illness that needs to be treated at the hospital still happens.
Some data on children reported that the majority who needed hospitalization for COVID-19 had at least one underlying medical condition.
The most common underlying conditions reported among children with COVID-19 include chronic lung disease (including asthma), heart disease, and conditions that weaken the immune system.
This information suggests that children with these underlying medical conditions may be at risk for more severe illness from COVID-19.
More data are needed to learn which underlying or complex medical conditions may put children at increased risk.
CDC is monitoring new information as it becomes available and will provide updates as needed.
Learn more about caring for children with special health care needs during a disaster and people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
In addition to following the recommendations to prevent getting sick and running essential errands, families should take extra steps recommended for persons with higher risk of severe COVID-19 illness and steps outlined for those with potential COVID-19 exposure or confirmed illness.
Helping children understand and follow recommendations, like social distancing and wearing cloth face coverings, can be challenging if your child has intellectual disabilities, sensory issues, or other special healthcare needs.
Supporting children with special healthcare needs can put additional demands and stress on families, especially during emergency situations.
You have likely found ways to manage the stress and challenges unique to your familys situation.
It is important to continue your familys coping methods, including reaching out to other family members, friends, support groups, and organizations that have been helpful in the past.
See information on ways to cope with stress (such as visiting parks, trails, or open spaces) and making your family stronger.
If you, or someone you care about, are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, or anxiety, or feel like you want to harm yourself or others:
If your child with special healthcare needs becomes sick with symptoms of COVID-19, contact your childs healthcare provider.
If your child has new or worsening emergency warning signs, such as trouble breathing, pain or pressure in the chest, confusion or inability to wake them up, or bluish lips or face, call 911.
If you think your child may have COVID-19, notify the operator so that first responders may be appropriately prepared to protect themselves and others.
Notify your childs healthcare provider if someone else in your house becomes sick with COVID-19, so they can provide any advice specific for your child.
See additional information if someone in the home is sick with COVID-19 or suspected of having COVID-19.
If your childs healthcare provider tells you to go to the hospital for any health problem, including COVID-19:
Create a household plan of action to help protect your health and the health of those you care about in the event of an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community:
Practice everyday preventive actions to help reduce your risk of getting sick and remind everyone in your home to do the same.
These actions are especially important for older adults and people who have severe chronic medical conditions:
Most people who get COVID-19 will be able to recover at home.
CDC has directions for people who are recovering at home and their caregivers, including:
If you develop any of these emergency warning signs* for COVID-19 get medical attention immediately:
*This list is not all inclusive.
Please consult your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.
Call 911 if you have a medical emergency: Notify the operator that you have, or think you might have, COVID-19.
If possible, put on a cloth face covering before medical help arrives.
Talk to the school or facility about their emergency operations plan.
Understand the plan for continuing education and social services (such as student meal programs) during school dismissals.
If your child attends a college or university, encourage them to learn about the schools plan for a COVID-19 outbreak.
Plan for potential changes at your workplace.
Talk to your employer about their emergency operations plan, including sick-leave policies and telework options.
Learn how businesses and employers can plan for and respond to COVID-19.
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces such as tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them using detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
To disinfect, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants will work.
See CDCs recommendations for household cleaning and disinfection.
CDC recommends handwashing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or, using alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available.
These actions are part of everyday preventive actions individuals can take to slow the spread of respiratory diseases like COVID-19.
CDC does not encourage the production and use of homemade hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredientsexternal iconexternal icon and the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product.
Local industries that are looking into producing hand sanitizer to fill in for commercial shortages can refer to the World Health Organization guidancepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
See FAQs about hand hygiene for healthcare personnel responding to COVID-2019.
During an outbreak, stay calm and put your preparedness plan to work.
Follow the steps below:
Put your household plan into action.
Depending on the situation, public health officials may recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19, such as school dismissals.
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or and watch for communication from your childs school.
If schools are dismissed temporarily, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Follow the advice of your local health officials.
Stay home if you can.
Talk to your employer to discuss working from home, taking leave if you or someone in your household gets sick with COVID-19 symptoms, or if your childs school is dismissed temporarily.
Employers should be aware that more employees may need to stay at home to care for sick children or other sick family members than is usual in case of a community outbreak.
CDC makes recommendations, shares information, and provides guidance to help slow down the spread of COVID-19 in the U.S. including guidance for schools and businesses.
CDC regularly shares information and provides assistance to state, local, territorial, and tribal health authorities.
These local authorities are responsible for making decisions including  stay at home or shelter in place.
What is included in these orders and how they are implemented are also decided by local authorities.
These decisions may also depend on many factors such as how the virus is spreading in a certain community.
Please contact your local health department to find out more.
CDC cannot address the policies of any business or organization.
CDC shares recommendations based on the best available science to help people make decisions that improve their health and safety.
Employers, schools, and organizations may decide to visibly screen for symptoms or perform on-site symptom checks.
If your employer, school, or organization requires you to present documentation regarding COVID-19 before returning to work or school (for example, proof of a negative COVID-19 lab test, if a test was performed, contact your healthcare provider to ask if he or she would be able to provide a form of documentation for you.
Documentation of self-isolation and self-quarantine may not be possible.
CDC has guidance for when and how people with COVID-19 can discontinue home isolation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/if-you-are-sick/steps-when-sick.html.
CDC also has guidance for what people should do if they think they have been exposed or feel sick: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
In all cases, follow the guidance of your healthcare provider and local health department.
Local decisions depend on local circumstances.
Current symptoms reported for patients with COVID-19 have included mild to severe respiratory illness with fever1, cough, and difficulty breathing.
Read about COVID-19 Symptoms.
Not everyone needs to be tested for COVID-19.
For information about testing, see Testing for COVID-19.
The process and locations for testing vary from place to place.
Contact your state, local, tribal, or territorial department for more information, or reach out to a medical provider.
State and local public health departments have received tests from CDC while medical providers are getting tests developed by commercial manufacturers.
While supplies of these tests are increasing, it may still be difficult to find someplace to get tested.
See Testing for COVID-19 for more information.
Using the CDC-developed diagnostic test, a negative result means that the virus that causes COVID-19 was not found in the persons sample.
In the early stages of infection, it is possible the virus will not be detected.
For COVID-19, a negative test result for a sample collected while a person has symptoms likely means that the COVID-19 virus is not causing their current illness.
There are actually many tests being used to diagnose COVID-19 that the U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
All of these diagnostic tests identify the virus in samples from the respiratory system, such as from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs.
Some tests are conducted at the testing site you visit, and results are available to you within minutes.
Other tests must be sent to a laboratory to analyze, a process that takes 1-2 days once the lab receives your samples.
Locations and types of testing sites vary depending on where you live (see question: Where can I get tested).
Check with your testing site to learn which test it uses.
You can find a patient information sheet about each test on the FDA websiteexternal icon.
In the coming weeks, healthcare providers in most states will begin offering home collection kits, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized for use during the current emergency.
A healthcare provider will need to give you the approved kit – the Pixel by LabCorp COVID-19 test home collection kit.
You will be able to collect your sample (a nasal swab) at home and then send your sample to a laboratory for analysis.
For more information please see FDAs most recent press releaseexternal icon.
Serology testing checks a sample of a persons blood to look for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
These antibodies are produced when someone has been infected, so a positive result from this test indicates that person was previously infected with the virus.
CDC is working with other federal agencies to evaluate the performance of commercially manufactured serology tests that are becoming increasingly available from healthcare providers.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
We do not know yet if the antibodies that result from infection with SARS-CoV-2 can protect someone from reinfection with this virus or how long antibodies to the virus will protect someone.
Scientists are conducting research to answer those questions.
Serology tests may not be able to tell you if you are currently infected because it typically takes 1 to 2 weeks to develop antibodies to SARS-CoV-2.
To tell if you are currently infected, you would need a test that identifies the virus in samples from your upper respiratory system, such as a nasopharyngeal swab.
CDC and partners are investigating to determine if you can get sick with COVID-19 more than once.
At this time, we are not sure if you can become re-infected.
Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based on what we know now, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 are:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including:
If you are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, you should:
If there is an outbreak in your community, stay home as much as possible.
Watch for symptoms and emergency signs.
If you get sick, stay home and call your doctor.
More information on how to prepare, what to do if you get sick, and how communities and caregivers can support those at higher risk is available on People at Risk for Serious Illness from COVID-19.
As CDC gets more information about COVID-19 cases here in the United States, we will update this list as needed.
Currently, there is no evidence to show that taking ibuprofen or naproxen can lead to a more severe infection of COVID-19.
People with high blood pressure should take their blood pressure medications, as directed, and work with their healthcare provider to make sure that their blood pressure is as well controlled as possible.
Any changes to your medications should only be made by your healthcare provider.
Based on available information, adults aged 65 years and older and people of any age with underlying medical conditions included on this list are at higher risk for severe illness and poorer outcomes from COVID-19.
CDC is collecting and analyzing data regularly and will update the list when we learn more.
People with underlying medical conditions not on the list might also be at higher risk and should consult with their healthcare provider if they are concerned.
We encourage all people, regardless of risk, to:
Generally, well-controlled means that your condition is stable, not life-threatening, and laboratory assessments and other findings are as similar as possible to those without the health condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Severity typically means how much impact the illness or condition has on your bodys function.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.
Some people with physical limitations or other disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection because of their underlying medical condition.
You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.
For recommendations and guidance on persons under investigation; infection control, including personal protective equipment guidance; home care and isolation; and case investigation, see Information for Healthcare Professionals.
For information on specimen collection and shipment, see Information for Laboratories.
For information for public health professional on COVID-19, see Information for Public Health Professionals.
COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is thought to mainly spread from close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) with a person who is currently sick with COVID-19.
The virus likely spreads primarily through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes, similar to how influenza and other respiratory infections spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
This type of spread is not a concern after death.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
People should consider not touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
Older people and people of all ages with severe underlying health conditions are at higher risk of developing serious COVID-19 illness.
There may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging after the body has been prepared for viewing.
Other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding should be avoided before, during, and after the body has been prepared, if possible.
If washing the body or shrouding are important religious or cultural practices, families are encouraged to work with their communitys cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
At a minimum, people conducting these activities should wear disposable gloves.
If splashing of fluids is expected, additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be required (such as disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N-95 respirator).
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
After removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
A funeral or visitation service can be held for a person who has died of COVID-19.
Funeral home workers should follow their routine infection prevention and control precautions when handling a decedent who died of COVID-19.
If it is necessary to transfer a body to a bag, follow Standard Precautions, including additional personal protective equipment (PPE) if splashing of fluids is expected.
For transporting a body after the body has been bagged, disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Embalming can be conducted.
During embalming, follow Standard Precautions including the use of additional PPE if splashing is expected (e.g.
disposable gown, faceshield or goggles and N95 respirator).
Wear appropriate respiratory protection if any procedures will generate aerosols or if required for chemicals used in accordance with the manufacturers label.
Wear heavy-duty gloves over nitrile disposable gloves if there is a risk of cuts, puncture wounds, or other injuries that break the skin.
Cleaning should be conducted in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimspdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time).
After cleaning and removal of PPE, perform hand hygiene by washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water is not available.
Soap and water should be used if the hands are visibly soiled.
Decedents with COVID-19 can be buried or cremated, but check for any additional state and local requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the remains of individuals who have died of certain infectious diseases.
When a US citizen dies outside the United States, the deceased persons next of kin or legal representative should notify US consular officials at the Department of State.
Consular personnel are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to provide assistance to US citizens for overseas emergencies.
If a family member, domestic partner, or legal representative is in a different country from the deceased person, he or she should call the Department of States Office of Overseas Citizens Services in Washington, DC, from 8 am to 5 pm Eastern time, Monday through Friday, at 888-407-4747 (toll-free) or 202-501-4444.
For emergency assistance after working hours or on weekends and holidays, call the Department of State switchboard at 202-647-4000 and ask to speak with the Overseas Citizens Services duty officer.
In addition, the US embassyexternal iconexternal iconexternal icon closest to or in the country where the US citizen died can provide assistance.
CDC does not require an autopsy before the remains of a person who died overseas are returned to the United States.
Depending on the circumstances surrounding the death, some countries may require an autopsy.
Sources of support to the family include the local consulate or embassy, travel insurance provider, tour operator, faith-based and aid organizations, and the deceaseds employer.
There likely will need to be an official identification of the body and official documents issued by the consular office.
CDC requirements for importing human remains depend upon if the body has been embalmed, cremated, or if the person died from a quarantinable communicable disease.
At this time, COVID-19 is a quarantinable communicable disease in the United States and the remains must meet the standards for importation found in 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 71.55 and may be cleared, released, and authorized for entry into the United States only under the following conditions:
Please see CDCs guidance for additional information.
CDC is working with other federal partners in a whole-of-government response.
This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will continue to provide updated information as it becomes available.
CDC works 24/7 to protect peoples health.
More information about CDCs response to COVID-19 is available online.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
A small number of pets have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after contact with people with COVID-19.
Pets have other types of coronaviruses that can make them sick, like canine and feline coronaviruses.
These other coronaviruses cannot infect people and are not related to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
However, since animals can spread other diseases to people, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, such as washing your hands and maintaining good hygiene.
For more information on the many benefits of pet ownership, as well as staying safe and healthy around animals including pets, livestock, and wildlife, visit CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People website.
No.
At this time, routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Although we know certain bacteria and fungi can be carried on fur and hair, there is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets.
However, because animals can sometimes carry other germs that can make people sick, its always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals, including washing hands before and after interacting with them.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Until we learn more about this new coronavirus, you should restrict contact with pets and other animals while you are sick with COVID-19, just like you would with people.
When possible, have another member of your household care for your animals while you are sick.
If you are sick with COVID-19, avoid contact with your pet, including
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wash your hands before and after you interact with pets and wear a cloth face covering.
We dont know for sure which animals can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
A tiger at a zoo in New York has also tested positive for the virus.
Recent research shows that ferrets, cats, and golden Syrian hamsters can be experimentally infected with the virus and can spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Pigs, chickens, and ducks did not become infected or spread the infection based on results from these studies.
Data from one study suggested dogs are not as likely to become infected with the virus as cats and ferrets.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus that causes COVID-19 and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus and how it spreads, but it appears it can spread from humans to animals in some situations.
CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including cats, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Most of these animals had contact with a person with COVID-19.
A tiger at a New York zoo has also tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
The virus that causes COVID-19 spreads mainly from person to person, typically through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
People sick with COVID-19 should isolate themselves from other people and animals, including pets, during their illness until we know more about how this virus affects animals.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a cloth face covering and wash your hands before and after you interact with pets.
Walking a dog is important for both animal and human health and well-being.
Walk dogs on a leash, maintaining at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other people and animals, do not gather in groups, and stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings.
Do not go to dog parks or public places where a large number of people and dogs gather.
To help maintain social distancing, do not let other people pet your dog when you are out for a walk.
There is a small number of animals around the world reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after having contact with a person with COVID-19.
Talk to your veterinarian about any health concerns you have about your pets.
If your pet gets sick after contact with a person with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.
Call your veterinarian and let them know the pet was around a person with COVID-19.
Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.
Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pets treatment and care.
Animals are only being tested in very rare circumstances.
Routine testing of animals is not recommended at this time, and any tests done on animals are done on a case by case basis.
For example, if the pet of a COVID-19 patient has a new, concerning illness with symptoms similar to those of COVID-19, the animals veterinarian might consult with public health and animal health officials to determine if testing is needed.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
There is no reason to think that any animals, including shelter pets, play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC does not have any evidence to suggest that imported animals or animal products pose a risk for spreading COVID-19 in the United States.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
CDC, the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) play distinct but complementary roles in regulating the importation of live animals and animal products into the United States.
Please refer to CDCs requirements for bringing a dog to the United States.
The current requirements for rabies vaccination apply to dogs imported from high-risk countries for rabies.
Imported animals will need to meet CDC and USDAexternal iconexternal icon requirements for entering the United States.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets and service animals, can spread the virus that causes COVID-19.
As with any animal introduced to a new environment, animals recently imported should be observed daily for signs of illness.
If an animal becomes ill, the animal should be examined by a veterinarian.
Call your local veterinary clinic before bringing the animal into the clinic and let them know that the animal was recently imported from another country.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest the virus that causes COVID-19 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.
The first case of a wild animal testing positive for the virus in the United States was a tiger with a respiratory illness at a zoo in New York City.
However, this tiger was in a captive zoo environment ,and public health officials believe the tiger became sick after being exposed to a zoo employee who was infected and spreading the virus.
If a wild animal were to become infected with the virus, we dont know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19.
Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.
Take steps to prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:
Other coronaviruses have been found in North American bats in the past, but there is currently no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 is present in any free-living wildlife in the United States, including bats.
In general, coronaviruses do not cause illness or death in bats, but we dont yet know if this new coronavirus would make North American species of bats sick.
Bats are an important part of natural ecosystems, and their populations are already declining in the United States.
Bat populations could be further threatened by the disease itself or by harm inflicted on bats resulting from a misconception that bats are spreading COVID-19.
However, there is no evidence that bats in the United States are a source of the virus that causes COVID-19 for people.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how bats could be affected by COVID-19.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met
See CDCs updated Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Persons Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
The COVID-19 outbreak in United States is a rapidly evolving situation.
The status of the outbreak varies by location and state and local authorities are updating their guidance frequently.
The White Houses Opening Up America Againexternal icon plan means some parts of the country may have different guidance than other areas.
Check with the state or local authorities where you are, along your route, and at your planned destination to learn about local circumstances and any restrictions that may be in place.
Cases of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) have been reported in all states, and some areas are experiencing community spread of the disease.
Travel increases your chances of getting and spreading COVID-19.
CDC recommends you stay home as much as possible, especially if your trip is not essential, and practice social distancing especially if you are at higher risk of severe illness.
Dont travel if you are sick or travel with someone who is sick.
As communities across the United States take steps to slow the spread of COVID-19 by limiting close contact, people are facing new challenges and questions about how to safely run essential errands to meet basic household needs, like:
CDC provides advice about how to meet these essential household needs in a safe and healthy manner on another webpage; content on this page is about travel.
Some travel may also be essential, like:
The following travel recommendations provide advice about how to prevent getting and spreading COVID-19 if you must travel.
Dont travel if you are sick or plan to travel with someone who is sick.
CDC recommends you stay home as much as possible and avoid close contact, especially if you are at higher risk of severe illness.
If you must travel, there are several things you should consider before you go.
Some types of travel (bus, plane, train) may require sitting next to others for a period of time.
Travel may also expose you to new parts of the country with differing levels of community transmission.
And, if youre infected, your travel may put others at risk– along the way, at your destination, and when you return home.
If you must travel, consider the following risks you might face, depending on what type of travel you are planning:
CDC recommends you stay home as much as possible and avoid close contact, especially if you are at higher risk of severe illness.
If you must travel, follow any state and local travel restrictions currently in place.
It is possible that some state and local governments may put in place travel restrictions, stay-at-home or shelter-in-place orders, mandated quarantines upon arrival, or even state border closures while you are traveling.
For more information and travel guidance, check with the state or local health department where you are, along your route, and at your planned destination.
Just because there are no restrictions at the time you plan to leave does not mean there wont be restrictions in place when you arrive.
CDC recommends you stay home as much as possible and avoid close contact, especially if you are at higher risk of severe illness.
Staying in temporary accommodations (hotels, motels, and rental properties) may expose you to the virus through person-to-person contact and possibly through contact with contaminated surfaces and objects.
CDC recommends you stay home as much as possible and practice social distancing, especially if you are at higher risk of severe illness.
However, if you must travel, be aware that many businesses (such as restaurants and hotels) may be closed.
Anticipate your needs before you go:
Dont travel if you are sick or plan to travel with someone who is sick.
If you must travel, protect yourself and others during your trip:
CDC recommends you stay home as much as possible and practice social distancing.
Traveling to visit friends and family increases your chances of getting and spreading COVID-19.
It is possible for someone to have COVID-19 and spread it to others, even if they have no symptoms.
Getting infected may be especially dangerous if you or your loved ones are at higher risk for severe complications from COVID-19.
People at higher risk for complications need to take extra precautions.
Although it can be hard to remain apart from loved ones during challenging or stressful times, try to connect with them in other ways, using video chats or phone calls.
CDC recommends you stay home as much as possible and avoid close contact, especially if you are at higher risk of severe illness.
Going camping at a time when much of the United States is experiencing community spread of COVID-19 can pose a risk to you if you come in close contact with others or share public facilities at campsites or along the trails.
This is because it is possible for someone to have COVID-19 and spread it to others, even if they have no symptoms.
Exposure may be especially unsafe if you are at higher risk for severe complications from COVID-19 and are planning to be in remote areas, far away from medical care.
Also be aware that many local, state, and national public parks have been temporarily closed due to COVID-19.
This HAN Update was updated on March 17, 2020 to include additional pre-travel advice about in-cabin isolation if patients become sick during a cruise and 14-day quarantine following completion of any cruise.
This language is consistent with CDCs new Level 3 Travel Warning for cruise ships.
See the Recommendations for Clinicians (#1e) and State and Local Health Departments sections.
Distributed via the CDC Health Alert Network
March 15, 2020, 5:45 PM ET
Updated: March 17, 2020, 12:10 PM ET
CDCHAN-00430
Summary
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends all persons defer any travel on cruise ships, including river cruises, worldwide because of the increased risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission onboard ships.
Deferring travel is especially important for older adults and all people with serious chronic medical conditions (such as heart disease, diabetes or lung disease), because of their increased risk for severe disease.
This health update provides information to clinicians and state and local health departments about the current coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) situation and the risks associated with travel on cruise ships, including river cruises.
Background
Cruise ship passengers, including those who take river cruises, are at increased risk of exposure to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
In the past month, there have been reports of outbreaks of COVID-19 among passengers and crew on cruises.
Recent examples include 696 cases and 8 deaths on the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan, 28 cases on the Grand Princess cruise ship in the United States, and at least 60 cases in 15 states associated with multiple Nile River voyages in Egypt as of March 14, 2020.
Illness onset occurred both onboard ships and after passengers returned to the United States.
The proximity of passengers and crew on small ships and boats traveling on rivers may result in an even higher number of COVID-19 infections.
Recommendations for Clinicians 
Ask all patients about their planned or recent cruise ship travel, including river cruises.
Recommendations for State and Local Health Departments
Check The Epidemic Information Exchange (Epi-X) notification system for information on COVID-19 cases on cruise ships and river cruises.
In accordance with the Level 3 travel warning (https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices/warning/coronavirus-cruise-ship) for cruise ships, cruise travelers should stay home for 14 days after returning from travel, monitor their health, and practice social distancing.
For More Information 
State and local health departments can contact CDCs Emergency Operations Center (EOC) at 770-488-7100 for assistance with obtaining, storing, and shipping appropriate specimens to CDC for testing, including after hours, weekends, or holidays.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) protects peoples health and safety by preventing and controlling diseases and injuries; enhances health decisions by providing credible information on critical health issues; and promotes healthy living through strong partnerships with local, national and international organizations.
###This message was distributed to state and local health officers, state and local epidemiologists, state and local laboratory directors, public information officers, HAN coordinators, and clinician organizations.###
Distributed via the CDC Health Alert Network
March 28, 2020, 11:00 AM ET
CDCHAN-00431
Summary
Chloroquine phosphate, when used without a prescription and supervision of a healthcare provider, can cause serious health consequences, including death.
Clinicians and public health officials should discourage the public from misusing non-pharmaceutical chloroquine phosphate (a chemical used in home aquariums).
Clinicians should advise patients and the public that chloroquine, and the related compound hydroxychloroquine, should be used only under the supervision of a healthcare provider as prescribed medications.
Background
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has become aware of two individuals who ingested non-pharmaceutical chloroquine phosphate, a chemical for aquarium use that is commercially available for purchase at stores and through internet websites.
One of the individuals died shortly after arrival to the hospital.
The second individual was critically ill with severe gastrointestinal symptoms and cardiac conduction abnormalities.
Upon recovery, the surviving individual reported to the media that they ingested the product to prevent infection with SARS-CoV-2, which causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), after seeing information on the medical use of chloroquine on television.
The product in their possession was in powder form inside a 2.2-lb.
container and labeled for Ornamental Fish Use Only.
CDC is also aware of unconfirmed media reports that these commercially available aquarium-use chemicals may be out of stock due to potential increased demand by the public.
At this time, there are no routinely available pharmaceutical products that are FDA-approved for the prevention or treatment of COVID-19.
Pharmaceutical chloroquine phosphate and hydroxychloroquine sulfate are approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat specific medical conditions, such as malaria, lupus, and rheumatoid arthritis.
Currently, these medications are being studied and evaluated as treatment for COVID-19; however, their efficacy to either prevent or treat this infection are unknown.
In overdose situations or when used inappropriately, these medications can lead to severe toxicity, including cardiac rhythm disturbances such as prolonged QT, severe hypokalemia, cardiovascular collapse, seizures, coma, and death.
Inappropriate uses include taking commercially available non-pharmaceutical preparations, taking chloroquine phosphate or hydroxychloroquine sulfate without a prescription, and taking additional doses not recommended by a healthcare provider.
Chloroquine phosphate has a narrow therapeutic index—it can be toxic at levels not much higher than those used for treatment—which raises the risk of inadvertent overdose.
Recommendations for Clinicians and Public Health Officials
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) protects peoples health and safety by preventing and controlling diseases and injuries; enhances health decisions by providing credible information on critical health issues; and promotes healthy living through strong partnerships with local, national and international organizations.
###This message was distributed to state and local health officers, state and local epidemiologists, state and local laboratory directors, public information officers, HAN coordinators, and clinician organizations.###
Distributed via the CDC Health Alert Network
March 08, 2020, 8:20 PM ET
CDCHAN-00429
Summary
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) continues to closely monitor and respond to the COVID-19 outbreak caused by the novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2.
This CDC Health Alert Network (HAN) Update highlights guidance and recommendations for evaluating and identifying patients who should be tested for COVID-19 that were shared on March 4, 2020, on the CDC COVID-19 website at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/hcp/clinical-criteria.html.
It supersedes the guidance and recommendations provided in CDCs HAN 428 distributed on February 28, 2020.
The outbreak that began in Wuhan, Hubei Province, has now spread throughout China and to 101 other countries and territories, including the United States.
As of March 8, 2020, there were more than 105,000 cases reported globally.
In addition to sustained transmission in China, there is now community spread in several additional countries.
CDC has updated travel guidance to reflect this information (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/travelers/index.html).
As of March 7, 2020, there were a total of 213 cases within the United States, of which, 49 were among repatriated persons from high-risk settings.
Among the other 164 cases that were diagnosed in the United States, 36 were among persons with a history of recent travel in China or other affected areas, and 18 were persons in close contact with another confirmed COVID-19 patient (i.e person-to-person spread); 110 cases are currently under investigation.
During the week of February 23, community spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 was reported in California in two places, Oregon, and Washington.
Community spread in Washington resulted in the first reported case of COVID-19 in a healthcare worker, and the first outbreak in a long-term care facility.
The first death due to COVID-19 was also reported from Washington; there have now been 11 reported deaths in the U.S. from COVID-19.
As of March 7, 2020, COVID-19 cases had been reported by 19 states.
CDC will continue to work with state and local health departments, clinicians, and laboratorians to identify and respond to other cases of COVID-19, especially those with an unknown source of infection, to limit further community spread.
The most recent update describing COVID-19 in the United States can be found at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/cases-in-us.html.
Recognizing persons who are at risk for COVID-19 is a critical component of identifying cases and preventing further transmission.
With expanding spread of COVID-19, additional areas of geographic risk are being identified and the criteria for considering testing are being updated to reflect this spread.
In addition, with increasing access to testing, the criteria for testing for COVID-19 have been expanded to include more symptomatic persons, even in the absence of travel history to affected areas or known exposure to another case, to quickly detect and respond to community spread of the virus in the United States.
Criteria to Guide Evaluation and Laboratory Testing for COVID-19
Clinicians should work with their local and state health departments to coordinate testing through public health laboratories.
In addition, COVID-19 diagnostic testing, authorized by the Food and Drug Administration under an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA), is becoming available in clinical laboratories.
This additional testing capacity will allow clinicians to consider COVID-19 testing for a wider group of symptomatic patients.
Clinicians should use their judgment to determine if a patient has signs and symptoms compatible with COVID-19 and whether the patient should be tested.
Most patients with confirmed COVID-19 have developed fever1 and/or symptoms of acute respiratory illness (e.g cough, difficulty breathing).
Priorities for testing may include:
There are epidemiologic factors that may also help guide decisions about COVID-19 testing.
Documented COVID-19 infections in a jurisdiction and known community transmission may contribute to an epidemiologic risk assessment to inform testing decisions.
Clinicians are strongly encouraged to test for other causes of respiratory illness (e.g influenza).
Mildly ill patients should be encouraged to stay home and contact their healthcare provider by phone for guidance about clinical management.
Patients who have severe symptoms, such as difficulty breathing, should seek care immediately.
Older patients and individuals who have underlying medical conditions or are immunocompromised should contact their physician early in the course of even mild illness.
International Areas with Sustained (Ongoing) Transmission
Last updated March 8, 2020
(https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/travelers/index.html)
Recommendations for Reporting, Laboratory Testing, and Specimen Collection
Clinicians should immediately implement recommended infection prevention and control practices (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/infection-control/control-recommendations.html) if a patient is suspected of having COVID-19.
They should also notify infection control personnel at their healthcare facility and their state or local health department if it is suspected that a patient may have COVID-19.
State health departments that have identified a person suspected of having COVID-19 or a laboratory-confirmed case should complete a PUI and Case Report form through the processes identified on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 website (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/php/reporting-pui.html).
If specimens are sent to CDC for laboratory testing, state and local health departments can contact CDCs Emergency Operations Center (EOC) at 770-488-7100 for assistance with obtaining, storing, and shipping, including after hours, on weekends, and holidays.
Guidance for the identification and management of potentially exposed contacts of a confirmed case of COVID-19 can be found in Interim US Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Persons with Potential Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Exposures: Geographic Risk and Contacts of Laboratory-confirmed Cases (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/php/risk-assessment.html).
Separate guidance for the management of potentially exposed contacts of a COVID-19 case who are healthcare personnel is provided in Interim U.S.
Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure in a Healthcare Setting to Patients with Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/guidance-risk-assesment-hcp.html).
For initial diagnostic testing for COVID-19, CDC recommends collecting and testing upper respiratory tract specimens (nasopharyngeal AND oropharyngeal swabs).
CDC also recommends testing lower respiratory tract specimens, if available.
For patients who develop a productive cough, sputum should be collected and tested for SARS-CoV-2.
The induction of sputum is not recommended.
For patients for whom it is clinically indicated (e.g those receiving invasive mechanical ventilation), a lower respiratory tract aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage sample should be collected and tested as a lower respiratory tract specimen.
Specimens should be collected as soon as possible once a person has been identified for testing, regardless of the time of symptom onset.
See Interim Guidelines for Collecting, Handling, and Testing Clinical Specimens from Patients Under Investigation (PUIs) for COVID-19 (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/lab/guidelines-clinical-specimens.html) and Biosafety FAQs for handling and processing specimens from suspected cases and PUIs (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/lab/biosafety-faqs.html).
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2For healthcare personnel, testing may be considered if there has been exposure to a person with suspected COVID-19 without laboratory confirmation.
Because of their often extensive and close contact with vulnerable patients in healthcare settings, even mild signs and symptoms (e.g sore throat) of COVID-19 should be evaluated among potentially exposed healthcare personnel.S.
Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure in a Healthcare Setting to Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/guidance-risk-assesment-hcp.html).
4Documentation of laboratory-confirmation of COVID-19 may not be possible for travelers or persons caring for COVID-19 patients in other countries.
5Affected areas are defined as geographic regions where sustained community transmission has been identified.
For a list of relevant affected areas, see Coronavirus Disease 2019 Information for Travel (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/travelers/index.html).
More information is available at the COVID-19 website: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) protects peoples health and safety by preventing and controlling diseases and injuries; enhances health decisions by providing credible information on critical health issues; and promotes healthy living through strong partnerships with local, national and international organizations.
###This message was distributed to state and local health officers, state and local epidemiologists, state and local laboratory directors, public information officers, HAN coordinators, and clinician organizations.###
Distributed via the CDC Health Alert Network
February 28, 2020, 15:05 ET (3:05 PM ET)
CDCHAN-00428
Summary
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) continues to closely monitor and respond to the COVID-19 outbreak caused by the novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2.
This CDC Health Alert Network (HAN) Update provides updated guidance on evaluating and testing persons under investigation (PUIs) for COVID-19.
It supersedes guidance provided in CDCs HAN 427 distributed on February 1, 2020.
The outbreak that began in Wuhan, Hubei Province, has now spread throughout China and to 46 other countries and territories, including the United States.
As of February 27, 2020, there were 78,497 reported cases in China and 3,797 cases in locations outside China.
In addition to sustained transmission in China, there is evidence of community spread in several additional countries.
CDC has updated travel guidance to reflect this information (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/travelers/index.html).
To date, there has been limited spread of COVID-19 in the United States.
As of February 26, 2020, there were a total of 61 cases within the United States, 46 of these were among repatriated persons from high-risk settings.
The other 15 cases were diagnosed in the United States; 12 were persons with a history of recent travel in China and 2 were persons in close household contact with a COVID-19 patient (i.e.
person-to-person spread).
One patient with COVID-19 who had no travel history or links to other known cases was reported on February 26, 2020, in California.
The California Department of Public Health, local health departments, clinicians, and CDC are working together to investigate this case and are identifying contacts with whom this individual interacted.
CDC, state and local health departments, other federal agencies, and other partners have been implementing measures to slow and contain transmission of COVID-19 in the United States.
These measures include assessing, monitoring, and caring for travelers arriving from areas with substantial COVID-19 transmission and identifying cases and contacts of cases in the United States.
Recognizing persons at risk for COVID-19 is a critical component of identifying cases and preventing further transmission.
With expanding spread of COVID-19, additional areas of geographic risk are being identified and PUI criteria are being updated to reflect this spread.
To prepare for possible additional person-to-person spread of COVID-19 in the United States, CDC continues to recommend that clinicians and state and local health departments consider COVID-19 in patients with severe respiratory illness even in the absence of travel history to affected areas or known exposure to another case.
Criteria to Guide Evaluation and Testing of Patients Under Investigation (PUI) for COVID-19
Local or state health departments, in consultation with clinicians, should determine whether a patient is a PUI for COVID-19.
The CDC clinical criteria for COVID-19 PUIs have been developed based on available information about this novel virus, as well as what is known about Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) (https://www.cdc.gov/sars/clinical/guidance.html) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/mers/interim-guidance.html#evaluation).
These criteria are subject to change as additional information becomes available.
These criteria are intended to serve as guidance for evaluation.
In consultation with public health departments, patients should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis to determine the need for testing.
Testing may be considered for deceased persons who would otherwise meet the PUI criteria.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed.
2For healthcare personnel, testing may be considered if there has been exposure to a person with suspected COVID-19 without laboratory confirmation.
Because of their often extensive and close contact with vulnerable patients in healthcare settings, even mild signs and symptoms (e.g sore throat) of COVID-19 should be evaluated among potentially exposed healthcare personnel.S.
Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure in a Healthcare Setting to Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/guidance-risk-assesment-hcp.html).cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/infection-control/control-recommendations.html).
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk, as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to healthcare personnel exposed in healthcare settings, as described in CDCs Interim U.S.
Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure in a Healthcare Setting to Patients with COVID-19 (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/guidance-risk-assesment-hcp.html).
4Documentation of laboratory-confirmation of COVID-19 may not be possible for travelers or persons caring for COVID-19 patients in other countries.
5Affected areas are defined as geographic regions where sustained community transmission has been identified.
Relevant affected areas will be defined as a country with at least a CDC Level 2 Travel Health Notice.
Current information is available in CDCs COVID-19 Travel Health Notices (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/travelers).
6Category includes single or clusters of patients with severe acute lower respiratory illness (e.g pneumonia, ARDS (acute respiratory distress syndrome) of unknown etiology in which COVID-19 is being considered.
Recommendations for Reporting, Testing, and Specimen Collection
Clinicians should immediately implement recommended infection prevention and control practices (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/infection-control/control-recommendations.html) if a patient is suspected of having COVID-19.
They should also notify infection control personnel at their healthcare facility and their state or local health department if a patient is classified as a PUI for COVID-19.
State health departments that have identified a PUI or a laboratory-confirmed case should complete a PUI and Case Report form through the processes identified on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 website (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/php/reporting-pui.html).
State and local health departments can contact CDCs Emergency Operations Center (EOC) at 770-488-7100 for assistance with obtaining, storing, and shipping appropriate specimens to CDC for testing, including after hours or on weekends or holidays.
Currently, diagnostic testing for COVID-19 is being performed at state public health laboratories and CDC.Testing for other respiratory pathogens should not delay specimen testing for COVID-19.
For initial diagnostic testing for SARS-CoV-2, CDC recommends collecting and testing upper respiratory tract specimens (nasopharyngeal AND oropharyngeal swabs).
CDC also recommends testing lower respiratory tract specimens, if available.
For patients who develop a productive cough, sputum should be collected and tested for SARS-CoV-2.
The induction of sputum is not recommended.
For patients for whom it is clinically indicated (e.g those receiving invasive mechanical ventilation), a lower respiratory tract aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage sample should be collected and tested as a lower respiratory tract specimen.
Specimens should be collected as soon as possible once a PUI is identified, regardless of the time of symptom onset.
See Interim Guidelines for Collecting, Handling, and Testing Clinical Specimens from Patients Under Investigation (PUIs) for COVID-19 (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/lab/guidelines-clinical-specimens.html) and Biosafety FAQs for handling and processing specimens from suspected cases and PUIs (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/lab/biosafety-faqs.html).
For More Information
More information is available at the COVID-19 website: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) protects peoples health and safety by preventing and controlling diseases and injuries; enhances health decisions by providing credible information on critical health issues; and promotes healthy living through strong partnerships with local, national and international organizations.
###This message was distributed to state and local health officers, state and local epidemiologists, state and local laboratory directors, public information officers, HAN coordinators, and clinician organizations.###
Distributed via the CDC Health Alert Network
February 1, 2020, 0900 ET (9:00 AM ET)
CDCHAN-00427
Summary
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) continues to closely monitor an outbreak of respiratory illness caused by a novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) that was initially detected in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China in December 2019.
This CDC Health Alert Network (HAN) Update provides a situational update and interim guidance to state and local health departments that supersedes guidance in CDCs HAN 426 distributed on January 17, 2020.
It also adds
Early in the outbreak, many of the patients with respiratory illness caused by 2019-nCoV in China had exposure to a large seafood and live animal market, suggesting animal-to-human transmission.
More recently, cases have been confirmed with no exposure to animal markets, indicating that person-to-person spread of the virus has occurred.
Chinese officials report that sustained person-to-person spread in the community is occurring in China.
The first US case-patient was identified on January 21, 2020, and had recently traveled from Wuhan, China.
Since that time, six additional cases have been confirmed in the United States, four among persons who traveled from Wuhan, and one a close contact of a confirmed case.
Globally, reported illnesses in people with 2019-nCoV have ranged from mild (no or few signs and symptoms), to severe, including death.
These findings are consistent with other coronaviruses, including Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) (https://www.cdc.gov/sars/) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/mers/index.html).
The goal of the ongoing US public health response is to identify and contain this outbreak and prevent sustained spread of 2019-nCoV in the United States.
Recommendations for Screening of Patients for 2019-nCoV in Healthcare Facilities 
Recommendations for screening of patients for possible 2019-nCoV infection are based on (1) current knowledge of the characteristics of clinical illness observed in early cases, and (2) the geographic distribution of current cases.
They reflect the current public health goal of rapidly containing and preventing transmission of 2019-nCoV illness.
Patients presenting to healthcare facilities should be assessed for exposures associated with risk of 2019-nCoV infections (e.g travel to China or close contact with a confirmed case) and for symptoms consistent with 2019-nCoV infection (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/hcp/clinical-criteria.html).
The assessment is intended to allow healthcare providers to make decisions about appropriate infection control and management of patients.
Note that the signs and symptoms of 2019-nCoV overlap with those associated with other viral respiratory tract infections.
Given the time of year, common respiratory illnesses, including influenza, should also be considered in patients who are screened.
(Figure 1)
pdf icon
If a patient meets these criteria:
Clinicians should immediately notify the healthcare facilitys infection control personnel and local health department.
The health department will determine if this patient needs to be considered a PUI for 2019-nCoV and be tested for infection.
Criteria to Guide Evaluation and Testing of Patients Under Investigation (PUI) for 2019-nCoV
Local health departments, in consultation with clinicians, should determine whether a patient is a PUI for 2019-nCoV.
The CDC clinical criteria for 2019-nCoV PUIs have been developed based on available information about this novel virus, as well as what is known about SARS and MERS.
These criteria are subject to change as additional information becomes available.
These criteria are intended to serve as guidance for evaluation and testing.
Patients should be evaluated and discussed with public health departments on a case-by-case basis for possible 2019-nCoV infection.
Testing decisions might be further informed by the clinical presentation or exposure history (e.g uncertain travel or exposure), and the presence of an alternative diagnosis that explains their clinical presentation.
Recommendations for Reporting, Testing, and Specimen Collection
Healthcare providers should immediately notify infection control personnel at their healthcare facility if a patient is classified a PUI for 2019-nCoV.
State health departments that have identified a PUI should immediately contact CDCs Emergency Operations Center (EOC) at 770-488-7100 and complete a 2019-nCoV PUI case investigation form (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-criteria.html#reporting-testing-specimen-collection).
CDCs EOC will assist local and state health departments with obtaining, storing, and shipping appropriate specimens to CDC, including afterhours or on weekends or holidays.
Currently, diagnostic testing for 2019-nCoV can be done only at CDC.
Testing for other respiratory pathogens should not delay specimen shipping to CDC.
For initial diagnostic testing for 2019-nCoV, CDC recommends collecting and testing upper respiratory (nasopharyngeal AND oropharyngeal swabs), and lower respiratory (sputum, if possible)) for those patients with productive coughs.
Induction of sputum is not indicated.
Specimens should be collected as soon as possible once a PUI is identified, regardless of the time of symptom onset.
See Interim Guidelines for Collecting, Handling, and Testing Clinical Specimens from Patients Under Investigation (PUIs) for 2019 Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/lab/guidelines-clinical-specimens.html).
Recommendations for Healthcare Providers
No vaccine or specific treatment for 2019-nCoV infection is available.
At present, medical care for patients with 2019-nCoV is supportive.
Persons with confirmed or suspected 2019-nCoV infection who are hospitalized should be evaluated and cared for in a private room with the door closed, ideally an airborne infection isolation room, if available.
For more information, see Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Known or Patients Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in a Healthcare Setting (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/hcp/infection-control.html).
Home care and isolation may be an option, based on clinical and public health assessment, for some persons.
Please see Interim Guidance for Preventing the Spread of 2019 Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in Homes and Communities (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/guidance-prevent-spread.html).
Those isolated at home should be monitored by public health officials to the extent possible.
Refer to Interim Guidance for Implementing Home Care of People Not Requiring Hospitalization for 2019 Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/guidance-home-care.html) for more information.
Notes
1Close contact is defined as:
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters), or within the room or care area, of a 2019-nCoV case for a prolonged period of time while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection); close contact can include caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a health care waiting area or room with a 2019-nCoV case
– or –
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a 2019-nCoV case (e.g being coughed on) while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment.
2Fever may be subjective or confirmed
See CDCs updated Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Known or Patients Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in a Healthcare Setting (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/infection-control.html).
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with 2019-nCoV (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in health care settings.
3 Documentation of laboratory-confirmation of 2019-nCoV may not be possible for travelers or persons caring for patients in other countries.
4 Category also includes any member of a cluster of patients with severe acute lower respiratory illness (e.g pneumonia, ARDS) of unknown etiology in which 2019-nCoV is being considered that requires hospitalization.
Such persons should be evaluated in consultation with state and local health departments regardless of travel history.
For More Information 
More information is available at the 2019 Novel Coronavirus website (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html) or by
calling 800-CDC-INFO | (800-232-4636) | TTY: (888) 232-6348
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) protects peoples health and safety by preventing and controlling diseases and injuries; enhances health decisions by providing credible information on critical health issues; and promotes healthy living through strong partnerships with local, national and international organizations.
###This message was distributed to state and local health officers, state and local epidemiologists, state and local laboratory directors, public information officers, HAN coordinators, and clinician organizations.###
Distributed via the CDC Health Alert Network
January 17, 2020, 2030 ET (8:30 PM ET)
CDCHAN-00426
Summary
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) continues to closely monitor an outbreak of a 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China that began in December 2019.
CDC has established an Incident Management System to coordinate a domestic and international public health response.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses.
Some cause illness in people; numerous other coronaviruses circulate among animals, including camels, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can evolve and infect people and then spread between people such as has been seen with Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/mers/index.html) and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV) (https://www.cdc.gov/sars/index.html).
Chinese authorities report most patients in the Wuhan City outbreak have been epidemiologically linked to a large seafood and animal market, suggesting a possible zoonotic origin to the outbreak.
Chinese authorities additionally report that they are monitoring several hundred healthcare workers who are caring for outbreak patients; no spread of this virus from patients to healthcare personnel has been reported to date.
Chinese authorities are reporting no ongoing spread of this virus in the community, but they cannot rule out that some limited person-to-person spread may be occurring.
China has reported that two of the patients have died, including one with pre-existing medical conditions.
Chinese health officials publicly posted the genetic sequence of the 2019-nCoV on January 12, 2020.
This will facilitate identification of infections with this virus and development of specific diagnostic tests.
Thailand and Japan have confirmed additional cases of 2019-nCoV in travelers from Wuhan, China.
It is possible that more cases will be identified in the coming days.
This is an ongoing investigation and given previous experience with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, it is possible that person-person spread may occur.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features associated with 2019-nCoV as the investigations in China, Thailand, and Japan continue.
This HAN Update provides a situational update and guidance to state and local health departments and healthcare providers that supersedes guidance in CDCs HAN Advisory 424 distributed on January 8, 2020.
This HAN Update adds guidance for evaluation of patients under investigation (PUI) for 2019-nCoV, prevention and infection control guidance, including the addition of an eye protection recommendation, and additional information on specimen collection.
Background
An outbreak of pneumonia of unknown etiology in Wuhan City was initially reported to WHO on December 31, 2019.
Chinese health authorities have confirmed more than 40 infections with a novel coronavirus as the cause of the outbreak.
Reportedly, most patients had epidemiological links to a large seafood and animal market.
The market was closed on January 1, 2020.
Currently, Chinese health authorities report no community spread of this virus, and no transmission among healthcare personnel caring for outbreak patients.
No additional cases of infection with 2019-nCoV have been identified in China since January 3, 2020.
On January 13, 2020 public health officials in Thailand confirmed detection of a human infection with 2019-nCoV in a traveler from Wuhan, China.
This was the first confirmed case of 2019-nCoV documented outside China.
On January 17, 2020 a second case was confirmed in Thailand, also in a returned traveler from Wuhan City.
On January 15, 2020 health officials in Japan confirmed 2019-nCoV infection in a returned traveler from Wuhan City.
These persons had onset dates after January 3, 2020.
These cases did not report visiting the large seafood and animal market to which many cases in China have been linked.
On January 11, 2020, CDC updated the level 1 travel health notice (practice usual precautions) for Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China with additional information (originally issued on January 6, 2020): https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices/watch/novel-coronavirus-china.
Recommendations for Healthcare Providers
Limited information is available to characterize the spectrum of clinical illness associated with 2019-nCoV.
No vaccine or specific treatment for 2019-nCoV infection is available; care is supportive.
The CDC clinical criteria for a 2019-nCoV patient under investigation (PUI) have been developed based on what is known about MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV and are subject to change as additional information becomes available.
Healthcare providers should obtain a detailed travel history for patients being evaluated with fever and acute respiratory illness.
CDC guidance for evaluating and reporting a PUI for MERS-CoV remains unchanged.
Criteria to Guide Evaluation of Patients Under Investigation (PUI) for 2019-nCoV
Patients in the United States who meet the following criteria should be evaluated as a PUI in association with the outbreak of 2019-nCoV in Wuhan City, China.
1) Fever1 AND symptoms of lower respiratory illness (e.g cough, shortness of breath)
–and in the last 14 days before symptom onset,
2) Fever1 OR symptoms of lower respiratory illness (e.g cough, shortness of breath)
–and in the last 14 days before symptom onset,
The above criteria are also available at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/clinical-criteria.html.
The criteria are intended to serve as guidance for evaluation.
Patients should be evaluated and discussed with public health departments on a case-by-case basis if their clinical presentation or exposure history is equivocal (e.g uncertain travel or exposure).
Recommendations for Reporting, Testing, and Specimen Collection
Healthcare providers should immediately notify both infection control personnel at their healthcare facility and their local or state health department in the event of a PUI for 2019-nCoV.
State health departments that have identified a PUI should immediately contact CDCs Emergency Operations Center (EOC) at 770-488-7100 and complete a 2019-nCoV PUI case investigation form available at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/downloads/pui-form.pdfpdf icon.
CDCs EOC will assist local/state health departments to collect, store, and ship specimens appropriately to CDC, including during afterhours or on weekends/holidays.
At this time, diagnostic testing for 2019-nCoV can be conducted only at CDC.
Testing for other respiratory pathogens should not delay specimen shipping to CDC.
If a PUI tests positive for another respiratory pathogen, after clinical evaluation and consultation with public health authorities, they may no longer be considered a PUI.
This may evolve as more information becomes available on possible 2019 nCoV co-infections.
For biosafety reasons, it is not recommended to perform virus isolation in cell culture or initial characterization of viral agents recovered in cultures of specimens from a PUI for 2019-nCoV.
To increase the likelihood of detecting 2019-nCoV infection, CDC recommends collecting and testing multiple clinical specimens from different sites, including all three specimen types—lower respiratory, upper respiratory, and serum specimens.
Additional specimen types (e.g stool, urine) may be collected and stored.
Specimens should be collected as soon as possible once a PUI is identified regardless of time of symptom onset.
Additional guidance for collection, handling, and testing of clinical specimens is available at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/.
Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients Under Investigation for 2019-nCoV
Although the transmission dynamics have yet to be determined, CDC currently recommends a cautious approach to patients under investigation for 2019-nCoV (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/clinical-criteria.html).
Such patients should be asked to wear a surgical mask as soon as they are identified and be evaluated in a private room with the door closed, ideally an airborne infection isolation room if available.
Healthcare personnel entering the room should use standard precautions, contact precautions, airborne precautions, and use eye protection (e.g goggles or a face shield).
Immediately notify your healthcare facilitys infection control personnel and local health department.
Additional Infection Control Practices Resources 
Notes
1Fever may not be present in some patients, such as those who are very young, elderly, immunosuppressed, or taking certain fever-lowering medications.
Clinical judgment should be used to guide testing of patients in such situations.
2Close contact with a person who is under investigation for 2019-nCOV.
Close contact is defined as—

a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters), or within the room or care area, of a novel coronavirus case for a prolonged period of time while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection); close contact can include caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a healthcare waiting area or room with a novel coronavirus case.
– or –
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a novel coronavirus case (e.g being coughed on) while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment.
See CDCs Interim Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients Under Investigation for 2019 Novel Coronavirus (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/infection-control.html).
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with novel coronavirus (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to those exposed in healthcare settings.
For More Information 
More information is available at at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/index.html or by calling 800-CDC-INFO | (800-232-4636) | TTY: (888) 232-6348
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) protects peoples health and safety by preventing and controlling diseases and injuries; enhances health decisions by providing credible information on critical health issues; and promotes healthy living through strong partnerships with local, national and international organizations.
###This message was distributed to state and local health officers, state and local epidemiologists, state and local laboratory directors, public information officers, HAN coordinators, and clinician organizations.###
Distributed via the CDC Health Alert Network
January 10, 2020, 1140 ET (11:40 AM ET)
CDCHAN-00425
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reminds clinicians that influenza B viruses can cause severe illness in people of all ages, including children.
CDC continues to recommend influenza vaccination and prompt antiviral treatment of high-risk outpatients and hospitalized patients with suspected influenza.
Summary
This health advisory notifies clinicians that influenza activity remains high in the United States.
Ongoing elevated activity is due to influenza B/Victoria viruses, increasing circulation of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses, and low levels of influenza B/Yamagata and influenza A(H3N2) viruses.
CDCs influenza forecasts suggest that national influenza activity will remain elevated for several more weeks.
Because influenza activity is elevated and both influenza A and B virus infections can cause severe disease and death, this health advisory also serves as a reminder that early treatment with antiviral medications improves outcomes in patients with influenza.
Early treatment with antiviral medications is recommended for hospitalized patients and high-risk outpatients, including children younger than two years.
Clinicians should continue efforts to vaccinate patients for as long as influenza viruses are circulating, and promptly start antiviral treatment of severely ill and high-risk patients with suspected influenza without waiting for laboratory confirmation.
Background
In the United States, influenza activity remains elevated and widespread, and the season is likely to last several more weeks (see CDC FluView report for details: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/index.htm).
Since early this season, influenza B viruses, specifically B/Victoria viruses, have been reported more frequently than other influenza viruses, followed by A(H1N1)pdm09.
Different viruses have predominated in different parts of the country and among different age groups.
Influenza B viruses can cause severe illness in people of all ages, including children.1 In past seasons, the proportion of influenza-related pediatric deaths associated with influenza B viruses has generally been higher than the proportion of influenza B among circulating viruses,2,3 and pediatric mortality from influenza B–associated hospitalizations has been reported to be higher than with influenza A–associated hospitalizations.4 So far this season, influenza B virus infections account for about half of hospitalizations reported through CDCs laboratory-confirmed influenza hospitalization surveillance network and the majority of reported influenza-associated pediatric deaths (https://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/index.htm).
Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses are increasing and becoming predominant in some regions.
These viruses can also cause severe illness, particularly in adults not originally exposed to currently circulating A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses.5 Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses currently comprise the majority of the other half of hospitalizations reported through CDCs laboratory-confirmed influenza hospitalization surveillance network.
CDC continues to recommend everyone six months of age and older get vaccinated for influenza.
CDC also recommends antiviral medications for the treatment of influenza, because antiviral treatment has shown clinical and public health benefit in reducing illness and lessening severe outcomes of influenza based on evidence from randomized controlled trials, meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials, and observational studies during past influenza seasons and during the 2009 H1N1 pandemic.6-13 Influenza antiviral medications are most effective in treating influenza and reducing complications when treatment is started early (within 48 hours of illness onset).
Some studies suggest clinical benefit among hospitalized patients and young children with febrile illness even when treatment was started three to five days after illness onset.14-20 
Three drugs are chemically related antiviral medications known as neuraminidase inhibitors: oral oseltamivir phosphate (available as a generic version or under the trade name Tamiflu®), inhaled zanamivir (trade name Relenza®), and intravenous peramivir (trade name Rapivab®).
These medications block the viral neuraminidase enzyme and have activity against both influenza A and B viruses.
The fourth drug is oral baloxavir marboxil (trade name Xofluza®), which is active against both influenza A and B viruses but has a different mechanism of action.
Baloxavir is a cap-dependent endonuclease inhibitor that interferes with viral RNA transcription and blocks virus replication.
In October 2019, FDA approved an indication for baloxavir treatment of acute uncomplicated influenza within two days of illness onset in people 12 years and older at high risk of developing influenza-related complications, based upon the findings of a clinical trial.22 In the clinical trial of early initiation of antiviral treatment for uncomplicated influenza in high-risk adolescents and adults, baloxavir was superior to placebo and had similar overall efficacy to oseltamivir in the time to alleviation of symptoms.
There are no available data for baloxavir treatment of influenza in pregnant women, immunocompromised people, those with severe disease, or hospitalized patients.
Recommended ages for treatment and prevention with antiviral medications are summarized in the table below.
Dosing and more detailed treatment considerations can be found in the Influenza Antiviral Medications: Summary for Clinicians (https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/summary-clinicians.htm)
For outpatients with acute uncomplicated influenza, oral oseltamivir, inhaled zanamivir, intravenous peramivir, or oral baloxavir may be used for treatment.
The recommended treatment course for uncomplicated influenza is—
Oral or enterically-administered oseltamivir is the only recommended antiviral medication for treating hospitalized patients with suspected or confirmed influenza and patients with severe or complicated illness with suspected or confirmed influenza (e.g pneumonia, exacerbation of underlying chronic medical condition) who are not hospitalized.
Please see the Influenza Antiviral Medications: Summary for Clinicians (https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/summary-clinicians.htm) for considerations regarding dosing and duration of antiviral treatment for patients with severe or complicated influenza.
There are insufficient data for use of inhaled zanamivir, intravenous peramivir, and oral baloxavir in patients with severe influenza disease.
Oral oseltamivir is preferred for treatment of pregnant women.
Oseltamivir has been shown to be safe for treating pregnant women, and pregnant women are recommended to receive the same antiviral dosing as non-pregnant people.
Baloxavir is not recommended for treating women or breastfeeding mothers, as there are no available efficacy or safety data.
A history of current season influenza vaccination does not exclude a diagnosis of influenza in an ill child or adult.
High-risk patients should be advised to call their healthcare provider promptly if they have symptoms of influenza.
Specimens from all hospitalized patients with suspected influenza should be tested with molecular assays with high sensitivity and specificity since influenza testing can help inform clinical management and prompt implementation of infection prevention and control measures for influenza.
Molecular assays (including reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction RT-PCR) should be used for influenza testing of hospitalized patients.
Treatment should be empiric and should start as soon as possible.23,24 Treatment should not wait for laboratory confirmation.
The following figure may be used as a guide for considering influenza testing (see https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/diagnosis/consider-influenza-testing.htm for footnotes)

Additional influenza resources for health professionals are available on the CDC website at https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals.
In addition, www.vaccinefinder.orgexternal icon and www.medfinder.orgexternal icon, are available to help individuals find places to get age-appropriate influenza vaccines or fill prescriptions for influenza antivirals.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) protects peoples health and safety by preventing and controlling diseases and injuries; enhances health decisions by providing credible information on critical health issues; and promotes healthy living through strong partnerships with local, national and international organizations.
###This message was distributed to state and local health officers, state and local epidemiologists, state and local laboratory directors, public information officers, HAN coordinators, and clinician organizations.###
Distributed via the CDC Health Alert Network
January 8, 2020, 1615 ET (04:15 PM ET)
CDCHAN-00424
Summary
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is closely monitoring a reported cluster of pneumonia of unknown etiology (PUE) with possible epidemiologic links to a large wholesale fish and live animal market in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China.
An outbreak investigation by local officials is ongoing in China; the World Health Organization (WHO) is the lead international public health agency.
Currently, there are no known U.S. cases nor have cases been reported in countries other than China.
CDC has established an Incident Management Structure to optimize domestic and international coordination if additional public health actions are required.
This HAN Advisory informs state and local health departments and health care providers about this outbreak and requests that health care providers ask patients with severe respiratory disease about travel history to Wuhan City.
Wuhan City is a major transportation hub about 700 miles south of Beijing with a population of more than 11 million people.
Background
According to a report from the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission, as of January 5, 2020, the national authorities in China have reported 59 patients with PUE to WHO.
The patients had symptom onset dates from December 12 through December 29, 2019.
Patients involved in the cluster reportedly have had fever, dyspnea, and bilateral lung infiltrates on chest radiograph.
Of the 59 cases, seven are critically ill, and the remaining patients are in stable condition.
No deaths have been reported and no health care providers have been reported to be ill.
The Wuhan Municipal Health Commission has not reported human-to-human transmission.
Reports indicate that some of the patients were vendors at the Wuhan South China Seafood City (South China Seafood Wholesale Market) where, in addition to seafood, chickens, bats, marmots, and other wild animals are sold, suggesting a possible zoonotic origin to the outbreak.
The market has been closed for cleaning and disinfection.
Local authorities have reported negative laboratory test results for seasonal influenza, avian influenza, adenovirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV), and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) among patients associated with this cluster.
Additional laboratory testing is ongoing to determine the source of the outbreak.
Health authorities are monitoring more than 150 contacts of patients for illness.
CDC has issued a level 1 travel notice (practice usual precautions) for this destination.
(https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices/watch/pneumonia-china).
On January 5, 2020, WHO posted an update on this situation, including an early risk assessment, which is available at: https://www.who.int/csr/don/05-january-2020-pneumonia-of-unkown-cause-china/en/external icon.
This guidance will be updated as more information becomes available.
For More Information 
1-800-CDC-INFO
https://www.cdc.gov/cdc-info/index.html
CDCs Emergency Operations Center: 770-488-7100
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) protects peoples health and safety by preventing and controlling diseases and injuries; enhances health decisions by providing credible information on critical health issues; and promotes healthy living through strong partnerships with local, national and international organizations.
###This message was distributed to state and local health officers, state and local epidemiologists, state and local laboratory directors, public information officers, HAN coordinators, and clinician organizations.###
Outbreaks of infectious diseases can happen on cruise ships because people spend time close together and with travelers from many countries.
Disease can spread between ships when crew members from a ship with an outbreak transfer to other ships.
Infected people may also travel on cruise ships between countries.
For these reasons, outbreaks of COVID-19 on cruise ships pose a risk for rapid spread of disease beyond the voyage and into communities across the globe.
Because of the unprecedented nature of the COVID-19 pandemic and the high risk of COVID-19 spread on cruise ships, the US government issued a No Sail Order for cruise ships in waters subject to US jurisdiction and has advised US travelers to defer all cruise travel.
The No Sail Order is published in the Federal Register.
CDC continues to work to control COVID-19 on cruise ships at sea while also protecting against further introduction and spread of COVID-19 into communities.
The COVID-19 pandemic is constantly evolving, and aggressive efforts are needed to contain the spread.
CDC will continue to evaluate and update our recommendations as the situation evolves.
In response to the unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic and the increased risk of spread of COVID-19 on cruise ships, CDC published the first industry-wide No Sail Order on March 14 to prevent, among other things, new passengers from boarding cruise ships.
CDC extended its No Sail Order, effective April 15, 2020, to continue to suspend all cruise ship operations in waters subject to US jurisdiction.
Among other things, cruise lines are required to develop comprehensive plans to prevent, detect, respond to, and contain COVID-19 on their cruise ships to protect the health and safety of both passengers and crew.
The extended Order is in effect until one of the following occurs:
The No Sail Order was extended to protect the public, cruise ship passengers, cruise ship crews, and other industry workers.
By restricting cruise ship passenger operations, the Order helps achieve several public health goals:
The No Sail Order applies to all cruise ships, which it defines as commercial passenger ships with the capacity to carry more than 250 people and where an overnight stay onboard by passengers or crew is anticipated.
The Order applies to all cruise ships operating, or seeking to operate, in waters subject to US jurisdiction, including those that have previously voluntarily suspended operations.
It does not apply to cargo ships.
Passengers who plan to travel by cruise ship should contact their cruise line companies directly for further information.
On March 17, 2020, CDC issued a Level 3 travel health notice with a clear recommendation to avoid all cruise travel due to ongoing spread of COVID-19 and the increased risk of person-to-person spread of infectious diseases on cruise ships.
The No Sail Order suspends all cruise ship operations in waters subject to US jurisdiction.
We are currently in a phase of the pandemic where it is necessary to implement strict measures to control the spread of COVID-19.
Just as the American public has a role to play by staying home to slow the spread, cruise lines have a role to play in properly caring for their crew, including isolating them if they are sick and quarantining them if they have been exposed.
Cruise lines should have their crew do the same thing that the American public has been asked to do:
CDC has provided clear guidance to cruise lines about how to keep their crew safe during the period of the No Sail Order, just as we have provided guidance to the American public.
Cruise ships have medical facilities on board that can provide medical care to sick crew members as needed.
As part of their cruise ship plans, cruise lines should make sure they have enough medical staff, equipment, supplies, and other resources to provide care for sick people on board.
They also need a plan to transfer sick crew members to a hospital on land if they need medical care that the ships medical facility cant provide.
CDC and federal partners are monitoring ships with crew only, and we are working with the cruise companies and local and state health departments to ensure that seriously ill crew members can get medical assistance on land if the ship cant provide it.
CDC remains committed to humanitarian medical evacuation for people in need of lifesaving support.
A small number of passengers are still aboard cruise ships in and around US waters.
These passengers are awaiting repatriation to their home countries.
CDC is working with partners as part of the Unified Command, including Coast Guard, Customs and Border Protection, port authorities, local and state health departments, and Department of State, along with cruise lines, to help remaining cruise ship passengers get home as quickly and safely as possible.
These are cruise ships that had international voyages with US ports, which are under US CDC jurisdiction.
International voyages without US ports of call are not under CDC jurisdiction and not included.
International cruise voyages were suspended on March 14, 2020, due to CDCs No Sail Order.
*CDC was notified about COVID-19-positive travelers who had symptoms while on board these ships.
For all other ships, CDC was notified about travelers who had symptoms and tested positive for COVID-19 within 14 days after disembarking.
Since these travelers symptoms began after the voyage, the traveler might have contracted COVID-19 during the voyage; however, other sources of transmission after the voyage cannot be ruled out.
COVID-19 can affect anyone, and the disease can cause symptoms ranging from mild to very severe.
For some other illnesses caused by respiratory viruses (such as influenza), some people may be more likely to have severe illness than others because they have characteristics or medical conditions that increase their risk.
These are commonly called risk factors.
Examples include being 65 years of age or older or having serious underlying medical conditions.
CDC is conducting disease surveillance and field investigations to better understand why some people are more likely to develop severe COVID-19 illness.
This is one of the top priorities in CDCs strategy to combat COVID-19.
What we learn from these efforts will provide vital information to help CDC scientists and other public health officials make decisions to protect our most vulnerable populations.
CDC carries out these activities in collaboration with state, local, and territorial health departments; public health, commercial, and clinical laboratories; vital statistics offices; health care providers; emergency departments; and academic and private sector partners.
People with risk factors may be more likely to need hospitalization or intensive care if they have COVID-19, or they may be more likely to die of the infection.
It is important to learn about risk factors for severe COVID-19 illness because it can help you:
Because COVID-19 is a new disease, more work is needed to better understand the risk factors for severe illness or complications.
Potential risk factors that have been identified to date include:
Additional research will help us confirm if these are risk factors for severe COVID-19 illness and determine if there are other factors that increase a persons risk.
CDC is working to identify risk factors for severe COVID-19 illness through a variety of investigations, some of which are described below.
These investigations include adults and children and examine severe illness resulting in hospitalizations and intensive care unit (ICU) admissions.
As we continue to investigate risk factors for severe illness, we will update this webpage with new findings and new investigations.
Compare characteristics of people with COVID-19 who have symptoms with characteristics of people with COVID-19 who do not have symptoms.
How people with COVID-19 who have symptoms are different from those with COVID-19 who do not have symptoms.
How people with COVID-19 who feel more sick (for example, sick enough to need to stay in bed or to seek medical care) are different from those with COVID-19 who feel less sick.
*Investigations used include: Ongoing household investigations
Compare characteristics of people with COVID-19 who are hospitalized with characteristics of:
Characteristics associated with illness that is severe enough to require hospitalization among people with COVID-19.
*Surveillance networks and investigations used include: COVID-NET; The U.S.
Flu Vaccine Effectiveness (VE) network, New Vaccine Surveillance Network (NVSN); Hospitalized Adult Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness Network (HAIVEN); and ongoing field investigations
Compare characteristics of people with COVID-19 who are hospitalized in ICUs with characteristics of:
How people with COVID-19 who are sick enough to need ICU care are different from less sick people with COVID-19 who are hospitalized, people with COVID-19 who are not hospitalized, and the U.S. general population.
*Networks used include: Influenza Vaccine effectiveness in critically ill patients (IVY)
Public health surveillance is the ongoing, systematic collection, analysis, and interpretation of health-related data essential to planning, implementation, and evaluation of public health practice.
For surveillance of COVID-19, and the virus that causes it, SARS-COV-2, CDC is using multiple surveillance systems run in collaboration with state, local, territorial, and academic partners to monitor COVID-19 disease in the United States.
COVID-19 surveillance draws from a combination of data sources from existing influenza and viral respiratory disease surveillance, syndromic surveillance, case reporting, commercial lab reporting, the healthcare safety system, ongoing research platforms, and other new systems designed to answer specific questions.
These systems, combined, create an updated, accurate picture of SARS-COV-2 spread and its effects in the United States and provide data used to inform the U.S. national public health response to COVID-19.
COVID-19 data can be used to help public health professionals and health care providers monitor the spread of COVID-19 in the United States and support better understanding of U.S. illness, disease severity, and social disruptions associated with COVID-19.
These data help inform the U.S. national public health response to COVID-19.
CDC U.S. COVID-19 case counts and death counts include both confirmed and probable cases and deaths.
This change was made to reflect an interim COVID-19 position statement pdf icon10 Pages, 251 KBexternal icon issued by the Council for State and Territorial Epidemiologists on April 5, 2020.
The position statement included a case definition and made COVID-19 a nationally notifiable disease.
A probable case or death is defined by
Delays in reporting can cause the number of COVID-19 cases reported on previous days to increase.
(Sometimes this effect is described as backfill.)
State, local, and territorial health departments report the number of cases that have been confirmed and share these data with CDC.
Since it takes time to conduct laboratory testing, cases from a previous day may be added to the daily counts a few days late.
The growing number of cases reflects the rapid spread of COVID-19 as many U.S. states and territories experience community spread.
Also, the number of cases of COVID-19 being reported in the United States is rising due to increased laboratory testing and reporting across the country.
More detailed and accurate data will allow us to better understand and track the size and scope of the outbreak and strengthen prevention and response efforts.
CDC updates information on laboratory testing from multiple sources.
This includes testing results from state, local and territorial public health departments, CDC and commercial laboratories.
The COVID-19 death count shown on the Cases in the U.S. web page includes deaths reported daily by state, local, and territorial health departments.
This count reflects the most real-time information CDC has based on preliminary reporting from health departments.
In contrast, provisional COVID-19 death counts from the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) are updated Monday-Friday based on information collected from death certificates.
These data represent the most accurate death counts.
However, because it can take several weeks for death certificates to be submitted and processed, these data currently are lagged by an average of 1–2 weeks and may not include all deaths that occurred during a given time period, especially for more recent periods.
Death counts from earlier weeks are continually revised and may increase or decrease as new and updated death certificate data are received.
Provisional COVID-19 death counts may therefore differ from other published sources, such as media reports or the Cases in the U.S. web page.
The mortality rate is the percentage of people who died out of the total number of cases reported.
Since this is an ongoing outbreak, the percentage might change daily.
There are several reasons for this, such as there may be delays in reporting of additional confirmed cases and not all cases will be detected.
CDCs overall case numbers are validated through a confirmation process with jurisdictions.
The process used for finding and confirming cases displayed by different places may differ.
Yes, CDC is modifying existing surveillance systems to track COVID-19.
On April 3 we posted the first of what will be a weekly surveillance report called, COVIDView.
The report, updated each Friday, will summarize and interpret key indicators, including information related to COVID-19 outpatient visits, emergency department visits, hospitalizations and deaths, as well as laboratory data.
As part of our weekly reporting, CDC has data on hospitalization rates and demographics as part of its COVID-NET surveillance system.
COVID-19 surveillance data is also used to produce publications.
Many of these reports can be found online through CDCs  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) .
COVID-19 data are also used to inform guidance documents.
CDC COVID Data Tracker is a website that allows users to interact with a variety of data on COVID-19 that is updated daily.
The website builds on other agency efforts – such as CDCs new weekly COVID-19 Surveillance report, COVIDView – to capture the impact the virus is having on the United States.
CDC COVID Data Tracker presents data using visual dashboards that include interactive maps, graphs and other visuals.
It is being developed in phases.
The first phase showcases data on U.S. cases and deaths of COVID-19 and social impacts of COVID-19 disease.
CDC COVID Data Tracker is updated daily.
Specifics of data reporting are described as a footnote on each page.
Upon its launch on April 17, 2020, CDC COVID Data Tracker users will be able to track the following data daily: U.S. cases and deaths of COVID-19 and social impacts of COVID-19 disease.
CDC COVID Data Tracker displays these data using visual dashboards that include interactive maps, charts and other visuals.
The data and information provided by COVID Data Tracker will be expanded over time.
The following data and information are currently planned for inclusion in COVID Data Tracker in future phases:
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
To ensure continuity of operations of essential functions, CDC advises that critical infrastructure workers may be permitted to continue work following potential exposure to COVID-19, provided they remain asymptomatic and additional precautions are implemented to protect them and the community.
A potential exposure means being a household contact or having close contact within 6 feet of an individual with confirmed or suspected COVID-19.
The timeframe for having contact with an individual includes the period of time of 48 hours before the individual became symptomatic.
Critical Infrastructure workers who have had an exposure but remain asymptomatic should adhere to the following practices prior to and during their work shift:
If the employee becomes sick during the day, they should be sent home immediately.
Surfaces in their workspace should be cleaned and disinfected.
Information on persons who had contact with the ill employee during the time the employee had symptoms and 2 days prior to symptoms should be compiled.
Others at the facility with close contact within 6 feet of the employee during this time would be considered exposed.
Employers should implement the recommendations in the Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 to help prevent and slow the spread of COVID-19in the workplace.
This interim guidance pertains to critical infrastructure workers, including personnel in 16 different sectors of work including:
Print Versionpdf icon
Everyday Steps, Steps When Someone is Sick, and Considerations for Employers
Printer friendly version pdf icon3 pages
alert icon Wear disposable gloves to clean and disinfect.
High touch surfaces include:
Tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, sinks, etc.
For soft surfaces such as carpeted floor, rugs, and drapes
Launder items (if possible) according to the manufacturers instructions.Use the warmest appropriate water setting and dry items completely.
For electronics, such as tablets, touch screens, keyboards, remote controls, and ATM machines
For clothing, towels, linens and other items
Interim Recommendations for U.S. Community Facilities with Suspected/Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
There is much to learn about the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Based on what is currently known about the virus and about similar coronaviruses that cause SARS and MERS, spread from person-to-person happens most frequently among close contacts (within about 6 feet).
This type of transmission occurs via respiratory droplets, but disease transmission via infectious aerosols is currently uncertain.
Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 to persons from surfaces contaminated with the virus has not been documented.
Transmission of coronavirus in general occurs much more commonly through respiratory droplets than through fomites.
Current evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2 may remain viable for hours to days on surfaces made from a variety of materials.
Cleaning of visibly dirty surfaces followed by disinfection is a best practice measure for prevention of COVID-19 and other viral respiratory illnesses in community settings.
It is unknown how long the air inside a room occupied by someone with confirmed COVID-19 remains potentially infectious.
Facilities will need to consider factors such as the size of the room and the ventilation system design (including flowrate air changes per hour and location of supply and exhaust vents) when deciding how long to close off rooms or areas used by ill persons before beginning disinfection.
Taking measures to improve ventilation in an area or room where someone was ill or suspected to be ill with COVID-19 will help shorten the time it takes respiratory droplets to be removed from the air.
This guidance provides recommendations on the cleaning and disinfection of rooms or areas occupied by those with suspected or with confirmed COVID-19.
It is aimed at limiting the survival of SARS-CoV-2 in key environments.
These recommendations will be updated if additional information becomes available.
These guidelines are focused on community, non-healthcare facilities such as schools, institutions of higher education, offices, daycare centers, businesses, and community centers that do, and do not, house persons overnight.
These guidelines are not meant  for cleaning staff in healthcare facilities or repatriation sites, households, or for others for whom specific guidance already exists.
Timing and location of cleaning and disinfection of surfaces
Linens, Clothing, and Other Items That Go in the Laundry
Interim Recommendations for U.S. Non-emergency Transport Vehicles that May Have Transported Passengers with Suspected/Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
People who are known or suspected to have COVID-19 may use non-emergency vehicle services, such as passenger vans, accessible vans, and cars, for transportation to receive essential medical care.
When transporting a known confirmed positive passenger, it is recommended that drivers wear an N95 respirator or facemask (if a respirator is not available) and eye protection such as a face shield or goggles (as long as they do not create a driving hazard), and the passenger should wear a facemask or cloth face covering.
Occupants of these vehicles should avoid or limit close contact (within 6 feet) with others.
The use of larger vehicles such as vans is recommended when feasible to allow greater social (physical) distance between vehicle occupants.
Additionally, drivers should practice regular hand hygiene, avoid touching their nose, mouth, or eyes, and avoid picking up multiple passengers who would not otherwise be riding together on the same route.
CDC recommends that individuals wear cloth face coverings in settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas with significant community transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others; these face coverings are not surgical masks, respirators, or personal protective equipment (PPE).
Cloth face coverings should not be placed on young children under age 2, anyone who has trouble breathing, or is unconscious, incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
The following are general guidelines for cleaning and disinfecting these vehicles.
Similar guidance can be found for cleaning and disinfecting homes, community facilities, and EMS vehicles used to transport persons with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
At a minimum, clean and disinfect commonly touched surfaces in the vehicle at the beginning and end of each shift and between transporting passengers who are visibly sick.
Ensure that cleaning and disinfection procedures are followed consistently and correctly, including the provision of adequate ventilation when chemicals are in use.
Doors and windows should remain open when cleaning the vehicle.
When cleaning and disinfecting, individuals should wear disposable gloves compatible with the products being used as well as any other PPE required according to the product manufacturers instructions.
Use of a disposable gown is also recommended, if available.
Gloves and any other disposable PPE used for cleaning and disinfecting the vehicle should be removed and disposed of after cleaning; wash hands immediately after removal of gloves and PPE with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, or use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
If a disposable gown was not worn, work uniforms/clothes worn during cleaning and disinfecting should be laundered afterwards using the warmest appropriate water setting and dry items completely.
Wash hands after handling laundry.
Plan, Prepare, and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Printer-friendly version:  pdf icon239 KB, 10 pages
Revisions were made on 3/12/2020 to reflect the following:
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the transmission and severity of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
Please check the CDC COVID-19 website periodically for updated interim guidance.
Health officials are currently taking steps to prevent the introduction and spread of COVID-19 into US communities.
Schools play an important role in this effort.
Through collaboration and coordination with local health departments, schools should take steps to disseminate information about the disease and its potential transmission within their school community.
Schools should prepare to take steps to prevent the spread of COVID-19 among their students and staff should local health officials identify such a need.
Schools should continue to collaborate, share information, and review plans with local health officials to help protect the whole school community, including those with special health needs.
School plans should be designed to complement other community mitigation strategies to protect high risk populations and the healthcare system, and minimize disruption to teaching and learning and protect students and staff from social stigma and discrimination.
Plans should build on everyday practices (e.g encouraging hand hygiene, monitoring absenteeism, communicating routinely) that include strategies for before, during, and after a possible outbreak.
This interim guidance is intended for administrators of public and private child care programs and K-12 schools.
Administrators are individuals who oversee the daily operations of child care programs and K-12 schools, and may include positions like child care program directors, school district superintendents, principals, and assistant principals.
This guidance is intended for administrators at both the school/facility and district level.
This guidance will help child care programs, schools, and their partners understand how to help prevent the transmission of COVID-19 within child care and school communities and facilities.
It also aims to help child care programs, schools, and partners react quickly should a case be identified.
The guidance includes considerations to help administrators plan for the continuity of teaching and learning if there is community spread of COVID-19.
Schools, working together with local health departments, have an important role in slowing the spread of diseases to help ensure students have safe and healthy learning environments.
Schools serve students, staff, and visitors from throughout the community.
All of these people may have close contact in the school setting, often sharing spaces, equipment, and supplies.
Information about COVID-19 in children is somewhat limited, but the information that is available suggests that children with confirmed COVID-19 generally had mild symptoms.
Person-to-person spread from or to children, as among adults, is thought to occur mainly via respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
Recent studies indicate that people who are infected but do not have symptoms likely also play a role in the spread of COVID-19.
However, a small percentage of children have been reported to have more severe illness.
Older adults and people who have serious underlying medical conditions are at highest risk of severe illness fromCOVID-19.
Despite lower risk of serious illness among most children, children with COVID-19-like symptoms should avoid contact with others who might be at high risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Schools should be prepared for COVID-19 outbreaks in their local communities and for individual exposure events to occur in their facilities, regardless of the level of community transmission, for example a case associated with recent travel to an area with sustained COVID-19 transmission.
The following decision tree can be used to help schools determine which set of mitigation strategies may be most appropriate for their current situation.
Any school in any community might need to implement short-term closure procedures regardless of community spread if an infected person has been in a school building.
If this happens, CDC recommends the following procedures regardless of the level of community spread:
Coordinate with local health officials.
Once learning of a COVID-19 case in someone who has been in the school, immediately notify local health officials.
These officials will help administrators determine a course of action for their child care programs or schools.
Dismiss students and most staff for 2-5 days.
This initial short-term dismissal allows time for the local health officials to gain a better understanding of the COVID-19 situation impacting the school.
This allows the local health officials to help the school determine appropriate next steps, including whether an extended dismissal duration is needed to stop or slow further spread of COVID-19.
Communicate with staff, parents, and students.
Coordinate with local health officials to communicate dismissal decisions and the possible COVID-19 exposure.
Make decisions about extending the school dismissal.
Temporarily dismissing child care programs and K-12 schools is a strategy to stop or slow the further spread of COVID-19 in communities.
Implement strategies to continue education and related supports for students.
The most important thing to do now is plan and prepare.
Administrators should reinforce healthy practices among their students and staff.
As the global outbreak evolves, schools should prepare for the possibility of community-level outbreaks.
Schools need to be ready if COVID-19 does appear in their communities.
Here are some strategies:
Review, update, and implement emergency operations plans (EOPs).
This should be done in collaboration with local health departmentsexternal icon and other relevant partners.
Focus on the components, or annexes, of the plans that address infectious disease outbreaks.
Teach and reinforce healthy hygiene practices.
Assess group gatherings and events.
Consider postponing non-critical gatherings and events.
Require sick students and staff to stay home.
Establish procedures for students and staff who are sick at school.
Create and test communications plans for use with the school community.
Review CDCs guidance for businesses and employers.
Child care and K-12 administrators can support their school community by sharing resources with students (if resources are age-appropriate), their families, and staff.
Coordinate with local health officials to determine what type of information might be best to share with the school community.
Consider sharing the following fact sheets and information sources:
For questions about students who plan to travel, or have recently traveled, to areas with community spread of COVID-19, refer to CDCs FAQ for travelers.
Schools can also consult with state and local health officials.
Schools may need to postpone or cancel trips that could expose students and staff to potential community spread of COVID-19.
Students returning from travel to areas with community spread of COVID-19 must follow guidance they have received from health officials.
COVID-19 information for travel is updated regularly on the CDC website.
If local health officials report that there are multiple cases of COVID-19 in the community, schools may need to implement additional strategies in response to prevent spread in the school, but they should continue using the strategies they implemented when there was no community transmission.
These additional strategies include:
Coordinate with local health officials.
This should be a first step in making decisions about responses to the presence of COVID-19 in the community.
Health officials can help a school determine which set of strategies might be most appropriate for their specific communitys situation.
Implement multiple social distancing strategies.
Select strategies based on feasibility given the unique space and needs of the school.
Not all strategies will be feasible for all schools.
For example, limiting hall movement options can be particularly challenging in secondary schools.
Many strategies that are feasible in primary or secondary schools may be less feasible in child care settings.
Administrators are encouraged to think creatively about all opportunities to increase the physical space between students and limit interactions in large group settings.
Schools may consider strategies such as:
Consider ways to accommodate the needs of children and families at risk for serious illness from COVID-19.
Consider if and how to honor requests of parents who may have concerns about their children attending school due to underlying medical conditions of their children or others in their home.
Additional strategies should be considered when there is substantial transmission in the local community in addition to those implemented when there is no, minimal, or moderate transmission.
These strategies include:
Continue to coordinate with local health officials.
If local health officials have determined there is substantial transmission of COVID-19 within the community, they will provide guidance to administrators on the best course of action for child care programs or schools.
These strategies are expected to extend across multiple programs, schools, or school districts within the community, as they are not necessarily tied to cases within schools or child care facilities.
Consider extended school dismissals.
In collaboration with local health officials, implement extended school dismissals (e.g dismissals for longer than two weeks).
This longer-term, and likely broader-reaching, dismissal strategy is intended to slow transmission rates of COVID-19 in the community.
During extended school dismissals, also cancel extracurricular group activities, school-based afterschool programs, and large events (e.g assemblies, spirit nights, field trips, and sporting events).
Remember to implement strategies to ensure the continuity of education (e.g distance learning) as well as meal programs and other essential services for students.
 FAQs for Administrators, Teachers, and Parents
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
Administrators should always reinforce healthy practices among their staff and students, as well as prepare for a potential case of COVID-19, regardless of the current level of community transmission.
As you create and update your preparedness plans, work with your local health officials to determine the most appropriate plan and actions for your school or program.
Together, you will need to consider your local community situation—whether you have local transmission in your community, and if so, the level of transmission (none/minimal, minimal to moderate, substantial).
CDC has created overall guidance, as well as guidance tailored for transmission level in your area to help child care programs, schools, and their partners understand how to help prevent COVID-19 and react quickly when a case is identified.
The guidance includes information about the following:
See CDCs full interim guidance for more details.
Encourage students and staff to take everyday preventive actions to prevent the spread of respiratory illnesses.
These actions include staying home when sick; appropriately covering coughs and sneezes; cleaning and disinfecting frequently touched surfaces; and washing hands often with soap and water.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Always wash hands with soap and water if they are visibly dirty.
Remember to supervise young children when they use hand sanitizer to prevent swallowing alcohol.
The most important thing you can do now is to prepare.
Schools need to be ready if COVID-19 does appear in their communities.
Here are some strategies:
Review and update your emergency operations plan in collaboration with your local health departmentexternal iconexternal icon.
Focus on the components or annexes of the plans that address infectious disease outbreaks.
Work with your local health officials to determine a set of strategies appropriate for your communitys situation.
Continue using the preparedness strategies implemented for no community transmission, and consider the following social distancing strategies:
If local health officials have determined there is substantial transmission of COVID-19 within the community, they will provide guidance to administrators on the best course of action for child care programs or schools.
These strategies are expected to extend across multiple programs, schools, or school districts within the community.
You may need to consider extended school dismissals (e.g.
dismissals for longer than 2 weeks).
This longer-term, and likely broader-reaching, dismissal strategy is intended to slow transmission rates of COVID-19 in the community.
During extended school dismissals, also cancel extracurricular group activities, school-based afterschool programs, and large events (e.g assemblies, spirit nights, field trips, and sporting events).
Remember to implement strategies to ensure the continuity of education (e.g distance learning) as well as meal programs and other essential services for students.
Schools and child care programs are not expected to screen children, students, or staff to identify cases of COVID-19.
If a community (or more specifically, a school) has cases of COVID-19, local health officials will help identify those individuals and follow up on next steps.
Share resources with the school community to help them understand COVID-19 and steps they can take to protect themselves:
If your school notices a substantial increase in the number of students or staff missing school due to illness, report this to your local health officials.
You should establish procedures to ensure students and staff who become sick at school or who arrive at school sick are sent home as soon as possible.
Keep anyone sick separate from well students and staff until the sick person can be sent home.
Immediately notify local health officials.
These officials will help administrators determine a course of action for their child care programs or schools.
You will likely dismiss students and most staff for 2-5 days.
This initial short-term dismissal allows time for the local health officials to gain a better understanding of the COVID-19 situation impacting the school and for custodial staff to clean and disinfect the affected facilities.
Work with the local health officials to determine appropriate next steps, including whether an extended dismissal duration is needed to stop or slow further spread of COVID-19.
Any decision about school dismissal or cancellation of school events should be made in coordination with your local health officials.
Schools are not expected to make decisions about dismissals on their own.
You may need to temporarily dismiss school for 2-5 days, if a student or staff member attended school before being confirmed as having COVID-19.
This initial short-term dismissal allows time for the local health officials to gain a better understanding of the COVID-19 situation impacting the school and for custodial staff to clean and disinfect the affected facilities.
Work with the local health officials to determine appropriate next steps, including whether an extended dismissal duration is needed to stop or slow further spread of COVID-19.
If there is substantial transmission in the local community, local health officials may suggest extended school dismissalspdf iconpdf icon (e.g dismissals for longer than two weeks).
This longer-term, and likely broader-reaching, dismissal strategy is intended to slow transmission rates of COVID-19 in the community.
Yes, consider implementing e-learning plans, including digital and distance learning options as feasible and appropriate.
Determine, in consultation with school district officials or other relevant state or local partners:
In the event of a school dismissal, extracurricular group activities and large events, such as performances, field trips, and sporting events should also be cancelled.
This may require close coordination with other partners and organizations (e.g high school athletics associations, music associations).
In addition, discourage students and staff from gathering or socializing anywhere, like at a friends house, a favorite restaurant, or the local shopping mall.
Ensure continuity of meal programs for your students.
Consider ways to distribute food to students who receive free or reduced cost meals.
Check with the US Department of Agriculture – Food and Nutrition Service for additional information: https://www.fns.usda.gov/disaster/USDAfoodsPandemicSchools.external icon If there is community spread of COVID-19, design strategies to avoid distribution in settings where people might gather in a group or crowd.
Consider options such as grab-and-go bagged lunches or meal delivery.
Consider alternatives for providing essential medical and social services for students.
Continue providing necessary services for children with special healthcare needs, or work with the state Title V Children and Youth with Special Health Care Needs (CYSHCN) Program.
CDC is currently working on additional guidance to help schools determine when and how to re-open in an orderly manner.
If you need immediate assistance with this, consult local health officials for guidance.
Stay in touch with your local and state health department, as well as the Department of Education.
Review updated CDC information for travelers, including FAQ for travelers, and consult with state and local health officials.
Health officials may use CDCs Interim US Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Persons with Potential Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Exposure in Travel-associated or Community Settings to make recommendations.
Individuals returning from travel to areas with community spread of COVID-19 must follow guidance they have received from health officials.
Teachers and students are in close contact for much of the day, and schools can become a place where respiratory diseases like COVID-19 can quickly spread.
Protect yourself and your students by practicing and promoting healthy habits during the school year.
You should also plan to say home if you have symptoms of COVID-19 like fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
Encourage parents to keep students at home if theyre sick.
Consider social distancing strategies, such as modifying classes where students are likely to be in very close contact; increasing space between desks; and allowing students to eat meals in the classroom.
As public conversations around COVID-19 increase, children may worry about themselves, their family, and friends getting ill with COVID-19.
Teachers can play an important role in helping children make sense of what they hear in a way that is honest, accurate, and minimizes anxiety or fear.
CDC has created guidance to help adults have conversations with children about COVID-19 and ways they can avoid getting and spreading the disease.
Schools are advised to ensure adequate supplies are available to support healthy hygiene practices, and to routinely clean and disinfect objects and surfaces that are frequently touched.
They are also working closely with local health officials to review and update their school emergency operation plans, and to determine if or when to dismiss schools.
Look out for information from your school district.
Information may come via phone, email, or website depending on your schools communication plan.
Local media outlets may provide updates, since they often monitor this information.
Information about COVID-19 in children is somewhat limited, but the information that is available suggests that children with confirmed COVID-19 generally had mild symptoms.
Person-to-person spread from or to children, as among adults, is thought to occur mainly via respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
Recent studies indicate that people who are infected but do not have symptoms likely also play a role in the spread of COVID-19.
However, a small percentage of children have been reported to have more severe illness.
People who have serious chronic medical conditions are believed to be at higher risk.
Despite lower risk of serious illness among most children, children with COVID-19-like symptoms should avoid contact with others who might be at higher risk, such as older adults and adults with serious chronic medical conditions.
As public conversations around COVID-19 increase, children may worry about themselves, their family, and friends getting ill with COVID-19.
Parents play an important role in helping children make sense of what they hear in a way that is honest, accurate, and minimizes anxiety or fear.
CDC has created guidance to help adults have conversations with children about COVID-19 and ways they can avoid getting and spreading the disease.
You can protect yourself and your students by practicing and promoting healthy habits during the school year.
Use this checklist to plan and take action if a COVID-19 outbreak occurs in your community.
Encourage students to stay home if sick 
If your student gets sick at school, keep the sick student away from well students until picked up.
Encourage your student to stay home if they are sick with any illness.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces and objects in the classroom
Follow CDCs guidance for cleaning and disinfecting community facilities, such as schools.
Let administrators know if you see a large increase in absenteeism.
Talk to your administrators about plans for teaching through digital and distance learning
Implement a plan to continue educating students through digital and distance learning (if applicable)
Seek guidance from your school administrator to determine when students and staff should return to schools 
Duration of school dismissals will be made on a case-by-case basis based on the most up-to-date information about COVID-19 and the specific situation in your community.
Students and staff should be prepared for durations that could last several days.
Administrators should work with their local health authorities to determine duration of dismissals.
You can help protect your family from COVID-19 by practicing and promoting everyday healthy habits.
If an outbreak occurs in your community, your school may dismiss students to prevent further spread of the virus.
Use this checklist to plan and take action if a COVID-19 outbreak occurs in your community.
Practice and reinforce good prevention habits with your family
Keep your child at home if sick with any illness
If your child is sick, keep them at home and contact your healthcare provider.
Talk with teachers about classroom assignments and activities they can do from home to keep up with their schoolwork.
Be prepared if your childs school or child care facility is temporarily dismissed
Talk with your employer about sick leave and telework options in case you need to stay home with your child.
Consider planning for alternate child care arrangements.
Keep track of school dismissal updates
Read or watch local media sources that report school dismissals or stay in touch with your school.
Talk to your school about options for digital and distance learning
Discourage children and teens from gathering in other public places while school is dismissed to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in the community
Seek guidance from your school administrator to determine when students and staff should return to schools 
Duration of school dismissals will be made on a case-by-case basis based on the most up-to-date information about COVID-19 and the specific situation in your community.
Students and staff should be prepared for durations that could last several days.
Administrators should work with their local health authorities to determine duration of dismissals.
These additional considerations are intended to provide guidance for a range of child care programs, including:
This information is intended for child care programs that remain open and should be used in conjunction with CDCs guidance for administrators of child care programs and K-12 schools.
This guidance does not supersede applicable federal, state, and local laws and policies for child care programs.
As you think about how your facility will deal with the impact of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), it is important to work with your local health officials, school districts, child care licensing boards/bodies, child care accreditation bodies, health consultants, and other community partners to determine the most appropriate plan and action.
This document is meant to help administrators create emergency operations plans and tailor them to your communitys level of transmission.
No matter the level of transmission in a community, every child care program should have a plan in place to protect staff, children, and their families from the spread of COVID-19.
See CDCs guidance for more details.
Plan ahead to ensure adequate supplies to support hand hygiene behaviors and routine cleaning of objects and surfaces.
If you have difficulty in obtaining these supplies, please contact your local Child Care Resource and Referral (CCR&amp;R) Agency to learn more about service organizations in your community who may have additional resources.
Your local CCR&amp;R Agency can be found under Resourcesexternal icon at Child Care Aware of America.
Encourage staff to take everyday preventive actions to prevent the spread of respiratory illness.
Require sick children and staff to stay home.
Have a plan if someone is or becomes sick.
Child care programs that remain open during the COVID-19 pandemic should address these additional considerations:
Some schools, child care programs, and service organizations are supporting their communities by providing temporary or emergency child care services for the children of essential service providers such as first responders, healthcare workers, transit or food retail workers, and persons who do not have paid leave, cannot work from home, or do not have a family caregiver at home.
Work with your local health officials to determine a set of strategies appropriate for your communitys situation.
Continue using preparedness strategies and consider the following social distancing strategies:
Persons who have a fever of 100.40 (38.00C) or above or other signs of illness should not be admitted to the facility.
Encourage parents to be on the alert for signs of illness in their children and to keep them home when they are sick.
Screen children upon arrival, if possible.
There are several methods that facilities can use to protect their workers while conducting temperature screenings.
The most protective methods incorporate social distancing (maintaining a distance of 6 feet from others) or physical barriers to eliminate or minimize exposures due to close contact to a child who has symptoms during screening.
You do not need to wear personal protective equipment (PPE) if you can maintain a distance of 6 feet.
If social distancing or barrier/partition controls cannot be implemented during screening, personal protective equipment (PPE) can be used when within 6 feet of a child.
However, reliance on PPE alone is a less effective control and more difficult to implement, given PPE shortages and training requirements.
Caring for Our Childrenexternal icon (CFOC) provides national standards for cleaning, sanitizing and disinfection of educational facilities for children.
Toys that can be put in the mouth should be cleaned and sanitized (see below).
Other hard surfaces, including diaper changing stations, door knobs, and floors can be disinfected.
When diaperingexternal icon a child, wash your hands and wash the childs hands before you begin, and wear gloves.
Follow safe diaper changing procedures.
Procedures should be posted in all diaper changing areas.
Steps include:
After diapering, wash your hands (even if you were wearing gloves) and disinfect the diapering area with a fragrance-free bleach that is EPA-registered as a sanitizing or disinfecting solution.
If other products are used for sanitizing or disinfecting, they should also be fragrance-free and EPA-registered.
If the surface is dirty, it should be cleaned with detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
If reusable cloth diapers are used, they should not be rinsed or cleaned in the facility.
The soiled cloth diaper and its contents (without emptying or rinsing) should be placed in a plastic bag or into a plastic-lined, hands-free covered diaper pail to give to parents/guardians or laundry service.
Download posters with diaper changing procedures.
It is important to comfort crying, sad, and/or anxious infants and toddlers, and they often need to be held.
To the extent possible, when washing, feeding, or holding very young children: Child care providers can protect themselves by wearing an over-large button-down, long sleeved shirt and by wearing long hair up off the collar in a ponytail or other updo.
School nurses in schools that have been re-purposed as emergency or temporary child care centers should use Standard and Transmission-Based Precautions when caring for patients with confirmed or possible COVID-19.
See: What Healthcare Personnel Should Know about Caring for Patients with Confirmed or Possible COVID-19 Infection.
Facilities should follow all other applicable federal, state, and local regulations and guidanceexternal icon related to safe preparation of food.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
To protect those at higher risk, its important that everyone practices healthy hygiene behaviors.
CDCs website contains a variety of resources for child care programs and K-12 schools, including detailed guidance, considerations for closures, and frequently asked questions for administrators, teachers, and parents.
Together, these resources provide additional information on:
The resources emphasize that any decision about temporary closures of child care programs or cancellation of related events should be made in coordination with your federal, state, and local educational officials as well as state and local health officials.
Child care programs are not expected to make decisions about closures on their own.
The resources also address steps to ensure continuity of meal programs and other essential services if your facility is closed; additional government resources related to meals and snacks can be found here: https://www.fns.usda.gov/cacfpexternal icon
Guidance is also available on these topics:
This guidance is for Institutes of Higher Education with students participating in international travel or study abroad programs.
Consider postponing or canceling student international travel programs
Given the global outbreak of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) institutes of higher education (IHE) should consider postponing or canceling upcoming student international travel programs.
IHE should consider asking current program participants to return to their home country.
Those overseeing student international travel programs should be aware that students may face unpredictable circumstances, travel restrictions, challenges in returning home or accessing health care while abroad.
IHEs should consider asking students participating in study abroad programs to return to the United States.
IHEs should work with state and local public health officials to determine the best approach for when and how (for example, chartered transportation for countries or areas assessed as high-risk for exposure) their study abroad students might return.
All plans for returning study abroad students should be designed to protect participants from stigma and discrimination.
The COVID-19 situation is dynamic.
Given the speed of spread and the number of countries experiencing community transmission, IHEs should evaluate the risks associated with choosing to maintain programs abroad and take the appropriate proactive measures.
IHEs that continue to maintain programs abroad should monitor COVID-19 for additional information.
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
As you plan and prepare, you should reinforce healthy practices to everyone on campus and prepare for a potential case of COVID-19, regardless of the level of community transmission.
As you create and update your preparedness plans, work with your local health officials to determine the most appropriate plan and action for your college or university.
Together, you will need to consider your local community situation—whether you have local transmission in your community, and if so, the level of transmission (none/minimal, minimal to moderate, substantial).
CDC has created guidance for the scenarios listed below, to help colleges, universities and their partners understand how to help prevent the transmission of COVID-19 within their campus, and to react quickly should a case be identified.
The administrators guidance includes information about the following:
See CDCs full interim guidance for more details.
Work with your local health department to develop/update your emergency operations plan and information-sharing system.
Institutional information systems can be used to get accurate and up-to-date information, and day-to-day absenteeism or changes in student health center traffic can help detect and respond to an outbreak.
Review and update your emergency operations plan in collaboration with your local health departmentexternal icon.
Focus on the components or annexes of the plans that address infectious disease outbreaks.
Visit CDCs healthcare facilities page for recommended steps healthcare facilities can take now to prepare for COVID-19.
Encourage students and staff to take everyday preventive actions to prevent the spread of respiratory illnesses, such as staying home when sick; appropriately covering coughs and sneezes; cleaning frequently touched surfaces; and washing hands often with soap and water.
If soap and water are not readily available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Always wash hands with soap and water if hands are visibly dirty.
Share resources with the school community to help them understand COVID-19 and steps they can take to protect themselves:
Work with your local health officials to determine a set of strategies appropriate for your communitys situation.
Continue using the preparedness strategies implemented for no community transmission, and consider the following social distancing strategies:
If local health officials have determined there is substantial transmission of COVID-19 within the community, they will provide guidance to administrators on the best course of action for their college or university.
Similar strategies will extend across organizations (e.g K-12 schools, business, community and faith-based organizations) in a collective effort to stop the spread of COVID-19.
Measures will likely include extended class suspension and event/activity cancellations (e.g suspension/cancellations for longer than two weeks).
This longer-term, and likely broader-reaching, strategy is intended to slow transmission rates of COVID-19 in the community.
During extended class suspensions, cancel extracurricular group activities and large events.
Remember to implement strategies to ensure the continuity of education, research, and housing as well as meal programs and other essential services for students.
You should establish procedures for anyone who becomes sick or arrives sick on campus.
Sick students, staff and faculty should be separated from others, given a mask to wear, if available and sent to their place or residence as soon as possible.
Sick residents of on-campus housing should avoid contact with individuals who are healthy.
Immediately notify local health officials.
These officials will help administrators determine a course of action for your college or university.
Administrators should work closely with their local health officials to determine if a short-term closure (for 2-5 days) of all campus buildings and facilities is needed.
In some cases, you may only need to close buildings and facilities that had been entered by the individual(s) with COVID-19.
This initial short-term class suspension and event and activity (e.g club meetings; on-campus sport, theater, and music events) cancellation allows time for the local health officials to gain a better understanding of the COVID-19 situation and for custodial staff to clean and disinfect the affected facilities.
It also allows the local health officials and administrators to determine appropriate next steps, including whether an extended duration is needed to stop or slow further spread of COVID-19.
Any decision about school dismissal or cancellation of events should be made in coordination with your local health officials.
Colleges and universities are not expected to make decisions about dismissals on their own.
You may need to temporarily dismiss school for 2-5 days, if someone with COVID-19 was on campus.
COVID-19.
This initial short-term dismissal allows time for the local health officials to gain a better understanding of the COVID-19 situation impacting the school and for custodial staff to clean and disinfect the affected facilities.
Work with the local health officials to determine appropriate next steps, including whether an extended dismissal duration is needed to stop or slow further spread of COVID-19.
If there is substantial transmission in the local community, local health officials may suggest extended school dismissals.
This longer-term, and likely broader-reaching, dismissal strategy is intended to slow transmission rates of COVID-19 in the community.
It depends on the situation at your school and community.
You may need to temporarily dismiss school for 2-5 days, if someone with COVID-19 was on campus.
This initial short-term dismissal allows time for the local health officials to gain a better understanding of the COVID-19 situation impacting the school and for custodial staff to clean and disinfect the affected facilities.
The need for an extended dismissal will be made based on what officials discover from contact tracing.
If there is substantial transmission in the local community, local health officials may suggest extended school dismissals.
This longer-term, and likely broader-reaching, dismissal strategy is intended to slow transmission rates of COVID-19 in the community.
Yes, consider ways that your college/university can adapt or use alternative teaching methods.
If your community has cases of COVID-19, work with your local public health officials to determine if you should temporarily cancel events.
If you decide to dismiss classes, you should also cancel extracurricular group activities and large events, such as club meetings, performances, social events, athletic team practices, and sporting events.
You should also discourage students, staff, and faculty from gathering or socializing elsewhere.
Schools should work with local health officials to assess when students, staff and faculty can return to campus.
Review updated CDC information for travelers, including FAQ for travelers, and consult with state and local health officials.
Health officials may use CDCs Interim US Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Persons with Potential Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Exposure in Travel-associated or Community Settings to make recommendations.
Individuals returning from travel to areas with community spread of COVID-19 must follow guidance they have received from health officials.
Plan, prepare, and respond to coronavirus disease 2019
Audience: This guidance is intended for use during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) public health emergency by federal, state, and local public health officials, respiratory protection program managers, leaders in occupational health services and industrial hygiene programs, and other leaders who are responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing occupational exposures in non-healthcare worksites.
Purpose: This document offers strategies to conserve, extend, and respond to shortages in the supply of NIOSH-approved filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs) used in non-healthcare worksites such as manufacturing and construction.
NIOSH-approved FFRs protect users by filtering particles out of the air the user is breathing and include several classes of filters, including N95s.
The following strategies apply the principles of the hierarchy of controls and are intended to assist employers in selecting strategies to control workplace exposures during times of known supply shortages caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Strategies 1 and 2 reinforce employer requirements for the continuous evaluation and implementation of traditional hazard control practices such as elimination, substitution, engineering and administration controls.
Other strategies described herein include certain allowances such as use of FFRs beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life to be incorporated into practice only during times of supply shortages during the COVID-19 public health emergency.
A secondary purpose is to reduce the demand for FFRs in general industry settings during the COVID-19 response so that (1) FFR manufacturers and distributors can maximize supplies to healthcare settings and (2) general industry worksites can evaluate if any excess inventories they may hold are suitable for redistributing (e.g selling, donating) to healthcare settings.
Employers should consider redistribution of excess inventories only if adequate exposure controls for their workers are implemented.
For guidance to prevent workplace exposures to acute respiratory illnesses, including COVID-19, please see CDCs Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers.
The expanding outbreak of COVID-19 in the United States has created an overwhelming demand for personal protective equipment (PPE), including NIOSH-approved FFRs, in healthcare facilities across the country.
Additionally, the supply chains of PPE from manufacturing countries have been substantially disrupted due to local COVID-19 spread and demand.
Because of this increase in demand and decrease in supply, CDC has provided guidance to healthcare settings for strategies to optimize their supply of N95 respirators.
This guidance describes surge capacity for healthcare facilities providing care in conventional, contingency, and crisis situations.
The decisions to implement measures for healthcare facilities in contingency and crisis situations are based, in part, on the availability of N95 respirators, specifically, and other types of respirators, in general.
In recognition of the demand for FFRs in the healthcare setting and the priority to protect healthcare workers who are the workers at highest risk for COVID-19, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has issued two emergency use authorizationsexternal icon to allow FFRs not typically worn in healthcare settings to be worn.
This may reduce the availability of these FFRs for other worksites.
Users of NIOSH-approved FFRs in non-healthcare settings should develop and implement strategies to conserve and extend their current stock of respirator supplies while protecting their workers during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Employers should implement alternative controls to reduce, as much as possible, their reliance on PPE, particularly FFRs.
Conventionally, a hierarchy of controls has been used to provide feasible and effective controls to protect workers.
Multiple control strategies can be implemented concurrently and/or sequentially.
This hierarchy can be described as follows:
Employers should evaluate work tasks and processes to identify those activities or processes where the elimination or substitution of hazards may be implemented.
While the most effective at controlling hazards, these may be the most difficult to implement in existing processes, particularly during times of national or local emergencies.
Engineering controls reduce workers exposures by placing a barrier between the hazard and the worker or removing the hazard at the source.
While the initial cost of engineering controls can be higher than the cost of administrative controls or PPE, engineering controls generally provide a cost savings over the longer term and can eliminate the need for respirators if properly designed, implemented, and maintained.
Examples for consideration includes:
Administrative controls are used with existing processes to limit or prevent a hazard by changing the way people work.
Examples include:
While engineering and administrative controls should be considered first when implementing controls, PPE can be part of a suite of strategies used to protect workers.
PPE includes respirators, protective gloves, protective eyewear and face shields, and a variety of other protective gear.
PPE is frequently used with existing processes where hazards are not particularly well-controlled.
This method for protecting workers is typically less effective than other measures due to the reliance on the user to put on, use, and take off the PPE correctly and the potential for PPE breaches.
Additionally, proper use of respiratory protection requires a comprehensive program (including medical clearance, training, and fit testing) that complies with OSHAs Respiratory Protection Standardexternal icon.
In times of high demand and low supply of PPE due to the COVID-19 pandemic, non-healthcare sector employers should evaluate current work practices and control strategies to create a strategic exposure prevention and control plan to continue to protect workers.
As part of such a plan, strategies for employers to consider are prioritized below.
These measures are recommended to conserve and extend their FFR supply and to respond to shortages of manufacturer-supplied FFRs during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has also provided guidanceexternal icon on many of these measures related to their enforcement of the Respiratory Protection Standard, 29 CFR 1910.134external icon, and certain other health standards, with regard to supply shortages of disposable N95 FFRs.
Employers who successfully implement strategies for conserving and extending their FFR supplies during the COVID-19 pandemic may find that they possess excess inventories.
It is recommended that employers consider redistributing (e.g selling, donating) available excess inventories to healthcare settings during the COVID-19 pandemic to help reduce known shortages of respirators.
Worksites that are no longer active due to emergency work stoppages and restrictions are encouraged to consider redistributing their excess PPE and fit test kits to their state medical countermeasure contacts, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)external icon, or through other appropriate channels.
Non-healthcare employers who bought large quantities of respirators in the months preceding the crisis should consider if they are willing to redistribute (e.g sell, donate) those respirators for healthcare use.
Plan, Prepare and Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019 
Older adults and people who have severe underlying chronic medical conditions like heart or lung disease or diabetes seem to be at higher risk for developing more serious complications from COVID-19 illness.
Find more information here.
Below are changes as of March 21, 2020
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
COVID-19 is a respiratory illness that can spread from person to person.
The outbreak first started in China, but the virus continues to spread internationally and in the United States.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this interim guidance as additional information becomes available.
The following interim guidance may help prevent workplace exposures to COVID-19, in non-healthcare settings.
(CDC has provided separate guidance for healthcare settings.)
This guidance also provides planning considerations for community spread of COVID-19.
To prevent stigma and discrimination in the workplace, use only the guidance described below to determine risk of COVID-19 infection.
Do not make determinations of risk based on race or country of origin and be sure to maintain confidentiality of people with confirmed coronavirus infection.
There is much more to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features of COVID-19 and investigations are ongoing.
Updates are available on CDCs web page.
Businesses and employers can prevent and slow the spread of COVID-19.
Employers should plan to respond in a flexible way to varying levels of disease transmission in the community and be prepared to refine their business response plans as needed.
According to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), most American workers will likely experience low (caution) or medium exposure risk levels at their job or place of employment (see OSHA guidance for employerspdf iconexternal icon for more information about job risk classifications).
Businesses are strongly encouraged to coordinate with stateexternal icon and localexternal icon health officials so timely and accurate information can guide appropriate responses.
Local conditions will influence the decisions that public health officials make regarding community-level strategies.
CDC has guidance for mitigation strategiespdf icon according to the level of community transmission or impact of COVID-19.
All employers need to consider how best to decrease the spread of COVID-19 and lower the impact in their workplace.
This may include activities in one or more of the following areas:
Actively encourage sick employees to stay home: 
Identify where and how workers might be exposed to COVID-19 at work:
Educate employees about how they can reduce the spread of COVID-19:
Identify a workplace coordinator who will be responsible for COVID-19 issues and their impact at the workplace.
Implement flexible sick leave and supportive policies and practices.
Assess your essential functions and the reliance that others and the community have on your services or products.
Determine how you will operate if absenteeism spikes from increases in sick employees, those who stay home to care for sick family members, and those who must stay home to watch their children if dismissed from childcare programs and K-12 schools.
Consider establishing policies and practices for social distancing.
Social distancing should be implemented if recommended by state and local health authorities.
Social distancing means avoiding large gatherings and maintaining distance (approximately 6 feet or 2 meters) from others when possible (e.g breakrooms and cafeterias).
Strategies that business could use include:
Employers with more than one business location are encouraged to provide local managers with the authority to take appropriate actions outlined in their COVID-19 response plan based on local conditions.
Consider improving the engineering controls using the building ventilation system.
This may include some or all of the following activities:
Support respiratory etiquette and hand hygiene for employees, customers, and worksite visitors: 
Perform routine environmental cleaning and disinfection:
Perform enhanced cleaning and disinfection after persons suspected/confirmed to have COVID-19 have been in the facility:
Advise employees before traveling to take additional preparations:
Take care when attending meetings and gatherings:
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
During an infectious disease outbreak, such as the current outbreak of COVID-19, small business owners must prepare for disruption in their business as well as prepare to protect their employees health and safety in the workplace.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness that can spread from person to person.
It spreads between people who are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet) and through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
Symptoms can include fever, cough, or difficulty breathing, which may appear 2-14 days after exposure.
These steps are recommended to protect employees and prepare your business for disruption:
Identify a workplace coordinator who will be responsible for COVID-19 issues and their impact at the workplace.
Examine policies for leave, telework, and employee compensation.
Review your leave policies with all employees and provide information about available employee assistance services.
Share information on steps they can take to protect themselves at work and at home, and any available
Identify essential employees and business functions, and other critical inputs such as raw materials, suppliers, subcontractor services/products, and logistics required to maintain business operations.
Explore ways you can continue business operations if there are disruptions.
Prepare business continuity plans for significant absenteeism, supply chain disruptions, or changes in the way you need to conduct business.
Establish an emergency communications plan.
Identify key contacts (with back-ups), chain of communications (including suppliers and customers), and processes for tracking and communicating about business and employee status.
Share your response plans with employees and clearly communicate expectations.
It is important to let employees know plans and expectations if COVID-19 occurs in communities where you have a workplace.
Healthy employees are crucial to your business.
Here are 10 ways to help them stay healthy.
Actively encourage sick employees to stay home.
Develop policies that encourage sick employees to stay at home without fear of reprisals, and ensure employees are aware of these policies.
Have conversations with employees about their concerns.
Some employees may be at higher risk for severe illness, such as older adults and those with chronic medical conditions.
Develop other flexible policies for scheduling and telework (if feasible) and create leave policies to allow employees to stay home to care for sick family members or care for children if schools and childcare close.
Talk with companies that provide your business with contract or temporary employees about their plans.
Discuss the importance of sick employees staying home and encourage them to develop non-punitive emergency sick leave policies.
Promote etiquette for coughing and sneezing and handwashing.
Provide tissues, no-touch trash cans, soap and water, and hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Plan to implement practices to minimize face-to-face contact between employees if social distancing is recommended by your state or local health department.
Actively encourage flexible work arrangements such as teleworking or staggered shifts.
Perform routine environmental cleaning.
Routinely clean and disinfect all frequently touched surfaces, such as workstations, countertops, handrails, and doorknobs.
Discourage sharing of tools and equipment, if feasible.
Consider the need for travel and explore alternatives.
Check CDCs Travelers Health for the latest guidance and recommendations.
Consider using teleconferencing and video conferencing for meetings, when possible.
Provide education and training materials in an easy to understand format and in the appropriate language and literacy level for all employees, like fact sheets and posters.
If an employee becomes sick while at work, they should be separated from other employees, customers, and visitors and sent home immediately.
Follow CDC guidelines for cleaning and disinfecting areas the sick employee visited.
For more tips and information See the CDC Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers and the OSHA Guidance for Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon.
The following FAQs build on the Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers and Guidance for Critical Infrastructure Workers.
These FAQs are not intended for healthcare facilities; CDC has provided separate Guidance for Healthcare Settings.
Employees who have symptoms when they arrive at work or become sick during the day should immediately be separated from other employees, customers, and visitors and sent home.
Employees who develop symptoms outside of work should notify their supervisor and stay home.
Sick employees should follow CDC-recommended steps.
Employees should not return to work until they have met the criteria to discontinue home isolation and have consulted with a healthcare provider and state or local health department.
Employers should not require sick employees to provide a COVID-19 test result or healthcare providers note to validate their illness, qualify for sick leave, or return to work.
Healthcare provider offices and medical facilities may be extremely busy and not able to provide such documentation in a timely manner.
In most cases, you do not need to shut down your facility.
But do close off any areas used for prolonged periods of time by the sick person:
Follow the CDC cleaning and disinfection recommendations:
In addition to cleaning and disinfecting, employers should determine which employees may have been exposed to the virus and need to take additional precautions:
Sick employees should follow CDC-recommended steps.
Employees should not return to work until they have met the criteria to discontinue home isolation and have consulted with a healthcare provider and state or local health department.
If an employee is confirmed to have COVID-19, employers should inform fellow employees of their possible exposure to COVID-19 in the workplace but maintain confidentiality as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
Employees may have been exposed if they are a close contact of someone who infected, which is defined as being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a person with COVID-19 for a prolonged period of time:
All other employees should self-monitor for symptoms such as fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
If they develop symptoms, they should notify their supervisor and stay home.
See Public Health Recommendations for Community-Related Exposure for more information.
To ensure continuity of operations of essential functions, CDC advises that critical infrastructure workersexternal iconexternal icon may be permitted to continue work following potential exposure to COVID-19, provided they remain symptom-free and additional precautions are taken to protect them and the community.
See Implementing Safety Practices for Critical Infrastructure Workers Who May Have Had Exposure to a Person with Suspected or Confirmed COVID-19 for more information.
Sick employees should follow steps to prevent the spread of COVID-19 if you are sick.
Employees should not return to work until they meet the criteria to discontinue home isolation and have consulted with a healthcare provider and state or local health department.
Employers should not require sick employee to provide a negative COVID-19 test result or healthcare providers note to return to work.
Employees with COVID-19 who have stayed home can stop home isolation and return to work when they have met one of the following sets of criteria:
Employees who appear to have COVID-19 symptoms, such as fever, cough, or shortness of breath, upon arrival to work or become sick during the day with COVID-19 symptoms should immediately be separated from other employees, customers, and visitors and sent home.
CDC has a symptom self-checker chatbot called Clara that employers and employees may find helpful.
It has a series of questions and recommends what level of medical care, if any, the user should seek.
It is not intended to provide diagnosis or treatment.
Acute respiratory illness is an infection of the upper or lower respiratory tract that may interfere with normal breathing, such as COVID-19.
Acute means of recent onset.
A respiratory illness that is acute, that is, of recent onset (for example, for a few days), and is used to distinguish from chronic respiratory illnesses like asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
No.
Allergy symptoms are not considered an acute respiratory illness.
To keep your employees safe, you should:
Have conversations with employees if they express concerns.
Some people may be at higher risk of severe illness.
This includes older adults (65 years and older) and people of any age with serious underlying medical conditions.
By using strategies that help prevent the spread of COVID-19 in the workplace, you will help protect all employees, including those at higher risk.
These strategies include:
In workplaces where its not possible to eliminate face-to-face contact (such as retail), consider assigning higher risk employees work tasks that allow them to maintain a 6-foot distance from others, if feasible.
Employers should not require employees to provide a note from their healthcare provider when they are sick and instead allow them to inform their supervisors or employee health services when they have conditions that put them at higher risk for diseases.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
Employees should continue to follow their routine policies and procedures for PPE (if any) that they would ordinarily use for their job tasks.
When cleaning and disinfecting, employees should always wear gloves and gowns appropriate for the chemicals being used.
Additional personal protective equipment (PPE) may be needed based on setting and product.
CDC does not recommend the use of PPE in workplaces where it is not routinely recommended.
Facilities can use the hierarchy of controls, such as administrative, and engineering controls – these strategies are even more effective at preventing exposures than wearing PPE.
CDC recommends employees protect themselves from respiratory illness with everyday preventive actions, including good hand hygiene.
Employees should wash hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, or use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not readily available, especially during key times when persons are likely to be infected by or spread germs:
Employees should take the following steps to protect themselves at work:
Screening employees is an optional strategy that employers may use.
There are several methods that employers can use to protect the employee conducting the temperature screening.
The most protective methods incorporate social distancing (maintaining a distance of 6 feet from others), or physical barriers to eliminate or minimize the screeners exposures due to close contact with a person who has symptoms during screening.
Examples to consider that incorporate these types of controls for temperature screening include:
If social distance or barrier controls cannot be implemented during screening, PPE can be used when the screener is within 6 feet of an employee during screening.
However, reliance on PPE alone is a less effective control and more difficult to implement given PPE shortages and training requirements.
Discard PPE into a trash can.
There is no evidence to suggest that facility waste needs any additional disinfection.
Social distancing means avoiding large gatherings and maintaining distance (at least 6 feet or 2 meters) from others when possible.
Strategies that businesses could use include:
Employers that do not currently offer sick leave to some or all of their employees may want to draft non-punitive emergency sick leave policies.
Ensure that sick leave policies are flexible and consistent with public health guidance and that employees are aware of and understand these policies.
Employers should not require sick employees to provide a COVID-19 test result or a healthcare providers note to validate their illness, qualify for sick leave, or to return to work.
Healthcare provider offices and medical facilities may be extremely busy and not able to provide such documentation in a timely manner.
Carefully consider whether travel is necessary, and use videoconferencing or teleconferencing when possible for work-related meetings and gatherings.
Employers should consider canceling, adjusting, or postponing large work-related meetings or gatherings that can only occur in-person.
Follow CDC guidance for events and mass gatherings.
When videoconferencing or teleconferencing is not possible, hold meetings in open, well-ventilated spaces, and space chairs at least 6 feet apart.
Encourage staff and attendees to stay home if sick.
Current evidence, though still preliminary, suggests that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, may remain viable for hours to days on surfaces made from a variety of materials.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
If the machinery or equipment in question are not accessible to employees or have not been in contact with someone infected with COVID-19, they will not present an exposure hazard.
If machinery or equipment are thought to be contaminated and can be cleaned, follow the CDC cleaning and disinfection recommendations.
First clean dirty surfaces with soap and water.
Second, disinfect surfaces using products that meet EPAs criteria for use against SARS-Cov-2external iconexternal icon and are appropriate for the surface.
If machinery or equipment are thought to be contaminated and cannot be cleaned, they can be isolated.
Isolate papers or any soft (porous) surfaces for a minimum of 24 hours before handling.
After 24 hours, remove soft materials from the area and clean the hard (non-porous) surfaces per the cleaning and disinfection recommendations.
Isolate hard (non-porous) surfaces that cannot be cleaned and disinfected for a minimum of 7 days before handling.
Follow safe work practices when using cleaning chemicalspdf iconpdf icon:
The risk of spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 through ventilation systems has not been studied, but is likely low.
Routine HVAC maintenance is recommended.
Although it is never the first line of prevention, consider general ventilation adjustments in your workplace, such as increasing ventilation and increasing the amount of outdoor air used by the system.
Maintain the indoor air temperature and humidity at comfortable levels for building occupants.
Cleaning staff should clean and disinfect all areas including offices, bathrooms, and common areas, focusing especially on frequently touched surfaces.
Operations can resume as soon as the cleaning and disinfection are completed.
The Department of Homeland Security developed a listexternal iconexternal icon of essential critical infrastructure workers to help state and local officials as they work to protect their communities, while ensuring continuity of functions critical to public health and safety as well as economic and national security.
State and local officials make the final determinations for their jurisdictions about critical infrastructure workers.
Functioning critical infrastructure is imperative during the response to the COVID-19 emergency, for both public health and safety as well as community well-being.
When continuous remote work is not possible, critical infrastructure businesses should use strategies to reduce the likelihood of spreading the disease.
This includes, but is not necessarily limited to, separating staff by off-setting shift hours or days and implementing social distancing.
These steps can preserve and protect the workforce and allow operations to continue.
To ensure continuity of operations of essential functions, CDC advises that critical infrastructure workers may be permitted to continue work following potential exposure to COVID-19, provided they remain asymptomatic and additional precautions are implemented to protect them and the community.
Critical infrastructure businesses have an obligation to limit, to the extent possible, the reintegration of in-person workers who have experienced an exposure to COVID-19 but remain symptom-free in ways that best protect the health of the worker, their co-workers, and the general public.
An analysis of core job tasks and workforce availability at worksites can allow the employer to match core activities to other equally skilled and available in-person workers who have not been exposed to the virus.
Critical infrastructure workers who have been exposed but remain symptom-free and must return to in-person work should adhere to the following practices before and during their work shift:
Sick employees should be sent home and should not return to the workplace until they have met the criteria to discontinue home isolation.
See Implementing Safety Practices for Critical Infrastructure Workers Who May Have Had Exposure to a Person with Suspected or Confirmed COVID-19 for more information.
CDC has guidance for first responders and law enforcement as well as a series of fact sheets for specific critical infrastructure worker groups.
Unless otherwise specified, the CDC interim guidance for businesses and employers applies to critical infrastructure workplaces as well.
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person to person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms or who never develop symptoms.
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
As an airline catering kitchen worker, you could be exposed to COVID-19 in situations such as having close contact with someone with COVID-19 or touching your mouth, nose, or eyes after handling frequently touched items used by someone with COVID-19 such as catering or food service carts or solid waste.
Employers of airline catering kitchen workers should have a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person to person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms or who never develop symptoms.
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
As an airline catering truck driver or helper, you could be exposed to COVID-19 in situations such as having close contact with someone with COVID-19 or touching your mouth, nose, or eyes after handling frequently touched items used by someone with COVID-19 such as catering and food service carts, used non-disposable food service items (e.g utensils and serving trays), and solid waste.
Employers of airline catering truck drivers or helpers should have a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
 Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms (pre-symptomatic) or who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic).
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
As a customer service representative or gate agent, potential sources of exposure could include assisting a person with COVID-19 in close contact or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes; or handling passenger items, such as baggage, boarding passes, identification documents, credit cards, and mobile devices.
Your employer should have a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
 Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms (pre-symptomatic) or who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic).
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
For baggage or cargo handlers, while the general risk remains low, potential sources of exposure could include surfaces touched or handled by a person with COVID-19 or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes.
Your employer should develop a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms (pre-symptomatic) or who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic).
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
As an airport custodial staff, while the general risk remains low, potential sources of exposure could include handling solid waste or cleaning public facilities (such as waste bins, tables, chairs, basins, toilets) with which a person with COVID-19 has interacted or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes.
Your employer should develop a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms (pre-symptomatic) or who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic).
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
As an airport passenger service worker, potential sources of exposure can occur from assisting, transporting, or escorting a person with COVID-19 and their belongings or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes.
Your employer should develop a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person to person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms or who never develop symptoms.
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
As an aircraft maintenance worker, you could be exposed to COVID-19 in situations such as when you have close contact with someone with COVID-19, when you touch surfaces while repairing aircraft interiors and lavatories that have been touched or handled by a person with COVID-19, or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes.
Employers of aircraft maintenance workers should develop a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Employers should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms or who never develop symptoms.
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
As an airport retail or food service worker, potential sources of exposure can occur while working in an airport store, bar, restaurant, or food concession stand if you are if in close contact with someone with COVID-19 or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes after handling items used by someone with COVID-19.
Your employer should have a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or airport personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus is spreading is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms (pre-symptomatic) or who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic).
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
For bus transit operators, potential sources of exposure include having close contact with a bus passenger with COVID-19, by contacting surfaces touched or handled by a person with COVID-19, or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes.
Employers of bus transit operators should develop a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees according to CDC business guidance.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or agency personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on worker exposures to COVID-19:
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people who are not showing symptoms.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads, but we are still learning more about this virus.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
As a grocery or food retail worker, potential sources of exposures include close contact for prolonged periods of time with a customer with COVID-19 and touching your nose, mouth, or eyes after handling items, cash, or merchandise that customers with COVID-19 have touched.
Grocery and food retail establishment employers should have a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees, following CDC Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Employers should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer or supervisor, who is responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
Utilize these sources for more information on reducing the risk of worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms (pre-symptomatic) or who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic).
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
For rail transit operators, potential sources of exposure include having close contact with a passenger with COVID-19, by contacting surfaces touched or handled by a person with COVID-19, or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes.
Employers of rail transit operators should develop a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees according to CDC business guidance.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or agency personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms (pre-symptomatic) or who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic).
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
For transit maintenance workers, potential sources of exposure include close contact with a coworker with COVID-19, contacting surfaces touched or handled by a person with COVID-19, or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes.
Perform routine cleaning and disinfection of all frequently touched non-porous surfaces within the interior of the transit vehicle on a daily basis and, in particular, before maintenance workers conduct repairs such as removing or repairing seats.
These surfaces can include hard seats, arm rests, door handles, seat belt buckles, light and air controls, adjacent walls and windows, and grab handles.
If the surfaces are visibly dirty, they should be cleaned prior to disinfectant application.
For soft or porous surfaces, remove any visible contamination if present and clean with appropriate cleansers indicated for use on these surfaces.
Wear the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for using the cleaning and disinfection products according to the product manufacturers instructions.
After removing PPE, employees should wash their hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
Work uniforms worn during cleaning and disinfecting should be laundered afterwards.
If possible, launder items using the warmest appropriate water setting for the items and dry items completely.
Clean hands after handling laundry by washing hands with soap and water or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Employers of transit maintenance workers should develop a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees according to CDC business guidance.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Employers should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or agency personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on worker exposures to COVID-19:
Printer-Friendly Versionpdf icon
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person:
Recent studies indicate that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms (pre-symptomatic) or who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic).
It also may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.
Cloth face coverings may prevent people who dont know they have the virus from transmitting it to others.
These face coverings are not surgical masks or respirators and are not appropriate substitutes for them in workplaces where masks or respirators are recommended or required.
For transit station workers, potential sources of exposure include having close contact with a transit passenger with COVID-19, by touching surfaces contaminated with coronavirus, or by touching your mouth, nose, or eyes.
Perform routine cleaning and disinfection of all frequently touched non-porous surfaces within the transit station on a daily basis.
These include kiosks, ticket machines, turnstiles, benches, handrails, garbage cans, door handles, payphones, restroom surfaces (e.g faucets, toilets, counters), elevator buttons, and system maps.
If the surfaces are visibly dirty, they should be cleaned prior to disinfectant application.
For soft or porous surfaces, remove any visible contamination if present and clean with appropriate cleansers indicated for use on these surfaces.
Wear the personal protective equipment (PPE) required for using the cleaning and disinfection products according to the product manufacturers instructions.
After removing PPE, wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
Work uniforms worn during cleaning and disinfecting should be laundered afterwards.
If possible, launder items using the warmest appropriate water setting for the items and dry items completely.
Clean your hands after handling laundry by washing your hands with soap and water or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.
Employers of transit station workers should develop a COVID-19 health and safety plan to protect employees according to CDC business guidance.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or agency personnel who are responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information on worker exposures to COVID-19:
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person to person:
Recent studies show that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms or who never develop symptoms.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Although the virus can survive for a short period on some surfaces, it is unlikely to be spread from products or packaging that are shipped over a period of days or weeks at regular temperatures.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
As a mail and parcel delivery driver, potential sources of exposure include having close contact with co-workers or delivery recipients, or when you touch surfaces touched or handled by a person who has COVID-19.
Stay home if you are sick
Mail and parcel delivery employers should develop a COVID-19 response plan to protect employees, following CDC business guidance.
This plan should be shared with you and your coworkers.
Your employer should consider the following guidance:
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer-designated contact or union representative about your concerns related to COVID-19.
See these sources for more information on worker exposures to COVID-19:
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person to person:
Recent studies show that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms or who never develop symptoms.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
As a driver-for-hire, potential sources of exposure include having close contact with passengers with COVID-19, or touching surfaces touched or handled by a person with COVID-19.
Stay home if you are sick
The rideshare services or taxi/limo transportation companies for whom you are a contract driver should develop and share a set of COVID-19 response measures to inform and help protect drivers and passengers.
They should:
Stay informed.
Review health and safety measures taken by your rideshare or transportation company about COVID-19.
See these sources for more information on worker exposures to COVID-19:
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
Our understanding of how the virus spreads is evolving as we learn more about it, so check the CDC website for the latest information.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person to person:
Recent studies show that the virus can be spread by people before they develop symptoms or who never develop symptoms.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at higher risk for more serious complications from COVID-19.
Potential sources of exposure include having close contact with individuals with COVID-19 when picking up or delivering food or groceries, or by touching surfaces touched or handled by a person with COVID-19.
Stay home if you are sick 
The food or grocery delivery company for whom you are a contract driver should develop and share a set of COVID-19 health and safety measures to inform and help protect delivery drivers.
They should:
Stay informed.
Review health and safety measures taken by your delivery service company about COVID-19.
See these sources for more information on worker exposures to COVID-19:
The Presidents Coronavirus Guidelines for America -- Slow the Spread of Coronavirus (COVID-19) More at Whitehouse.govpdf iconexternal icon.
Spanishpdf iconexternal icon Chinesepdf icon Vietnamesepdf icon Koreanpdf icon
Large events and mass gatherings can contribute to the spread of COVID-19 in the United States via travelers who attend these events and introduce the virus to new communities.
Examples of large events and mass gatherings include conferences, festivals, parades, concerts, sporting events, weddings, and other types of assemblies.
These events can be planned not only by organizations and communities but also by individuals.
Recommendations for schools, institutes of higher learning, or businesses are available.
Printer Friendly Versionpdf icon
Revisions were made on 3/12/2020 to reflect the following:
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this interim guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
This interim guidance is intended for organizers and staff responsible for planning mass gatherings or large community events in the United States.
A mass gathering is a planned or spontaneous event with a large number of people in attendance that could strain the planning and response resources of the community hosting the event, such as a concert, festival, conference, or sporting event.
Guidance specific to schools and childcare settings, institutions of higher education, and community- and faith-based organizations can be found on CDCs website focused on prevention COVID-19 spread in communities.
COVID-19 is an emerging respiratory disease and there is more to learn about its transmission, clinical course, and populations at increased risk of disease and complications (see How COVID-19 Spreads).
Everyone can do their part to help plan, prepare, and respond to this emerging public health threat.
Older adults and persons with severe underlying health conditions are considered to be at increased risk of more serious illness after contracting COVID-19.
Priority should be given to ensuring the safety of these groups of people, particularly for any mass gatherings that are expected to have a large number of older adults or persons with underlying conditions.
As the COVID-19 outbreak evolves, CDC strongly encourages event organizers and staff to prepare for the possibility of outbreaks in their communities.
Creating an emergency plan for mass gatherings and large community events can help protect you and the health of your event participants and the local community.
CDC has developed recommended actions for preventing the spread of COVID-19 at mass gatherings and large community events.
This guidance suggests strategies to help you plan for and implement ways in which to better protect all involved in a mass gathering.
Organizers should continually assess, based on current conditions, whether to postpone, cancel, or significantly reduce the number of attendees (if possible) for mass gatherings.
Listed below are some considerations organizers should keep in mind as they make decisions about whether to postpone or cancel an event.
If organizers decide to proceed with an event they should consult the Steps to Plan, Prepare, and Proceed with a Mass Gathering section of this document.
There are a number of factors to consider when determining the need to postpone or cancel a large gathering.
These include:
The overall number of attendees.
Larger gatherings (for example, more than 250 people) offer more opportunities for person-to-person contact and therefore pose greater risk of COVID-19 transmission.
The number of people attending who are at greater risk of more serious illness after contracting COVID-19.
Older adults and persons with severe pre-existing health conditions are thought to be at increased risk.
The density of attendees within a confined area.
Based on what is currently known about the virus, spread from person-to-person happens most frequently among close contacts (within 6 feet).
The potential economic impact to participants, attendees, staff, and the larger community.
The level of transmission in your local community and the level of transmission in the areas from which your attendees will travel.
To better understand the level of community transmission in your community (and in the communities from which your attendees will be traveling), consult with your local and/or state public health department.
If there are ways in which to significantly reduce the number of attendees.
For example, for sporting events or school concerts, organizers could consider holding the event but significantly reduce the number of audience members.
At a minimal-to-moderate level of community transmission, it is recommended to:
Cancel community-wide mass gatherings (for example, &gt;250 people; the cutoff threshold is at the discretion of community leadership based on the current circumstances the community is facing and the nature of the eventpdf icon) or move to smaller groupings.
Cancel gatherings of more than 10 people for organizations that serve higher-risk populationspdf icon.
At a substantial level of community transmission, it is recommended to cancel mass gatherings of any size.
The details of your emergency operations plan should be based on the size and duration of your events, demographics of the participants, complexity of your event operations, and type of on-site services and activities your event may offer.
Review the existing emergency operations plans for your venues 
Meet with the emergency operations coordinator or planning team at your venues.
Discuss the emergency operations plans and determine how they may impact aspects of your events, such as personnel, security, services and activities, functions, and resources.
Work with the emergency operations coordinator or planning team to prepare for the key prevention strategies outlined in this guidance.
Develop a contingency plan that addresses various scenarios described below which you may encounter during a COVID-19 outbreak.
Establish relationships with key community partners and stakeholders.
When forming key relationships for your events, include relevant partners such as the local public health department, community leaders, faith-based organizations, vendors, suppliers, hospitals, hotels, airlines, transportation companies, and law enforcement.
Collaborate and coordinate with them on broader planning efforts.
Clearly identify each partners role, responsibilities, and decision-making authority.
Contact your local public health department for a copy of their outbreak response and mitigation plan for your community.
Participate in community-wide emergency preparedness activities.
Address key prevention strategies in your emergency operations plan
Promote the daily practice of everyday preventive actions.
Use health messages and materials developed by credible public health sources such as CDC or your local public health department to encourage your event staff and participants to practice good personal health habits.
Consider displaying signs (physical and/or electronic) throughout the event to provide frequent reminders to participants to engage in everyday preventive actions to help prevent the spread of COVID-19.
These include:
Handshakes and high-fives are often exchanged at meetings and sporting events, and these can be ways in which COVID-19 can be transmitted from person to person.
As a way of decreasing the social pressure to engage in these common behaviors, consider displaying signs (physical and/or electronic) that discourage these actions during the gathering.
Note: Use culturally appropriate messages, materials, and resources.
Provide COVID-19 prevention supplies to event staff and participants.
Ensure that your events have supplies for event staff and participants, such as hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol, tissues, trash baskets, disposable facemasks, and cleaners and disinfectants.
Clean frequently touched surfaces and objects with detergent and water prior to disinfection, especially surfaces that are visibly dirty.
Note: Disposable facemaskspdf icon should be kept on-site and used only if someone (worker or attendee) becomes sick at your event.
Those who become sick should be immediately isolated from staff and participants who are not sick and given a clean disposable facemask to wear.
Note: Use culturally appropriate messages, materials, and resources.
Plan for staff absences.
Develop and implement flexible attendance and sick-leave policies.
Event staff need to stay home when they are sick, or they may need to stay home to care for a sick household member or care for their children in the event of school dismissals.
Allow staff to work from home when possible.
Identify critical job functions and positions and plan for alternative coverage by cross-training staff (similar to planning for holiday staffing).
Provide instructions about how and when to safely return to work.
Implement ﬂexible staff attendance and sick-leave policies (if possible).
Require staff to stay home if they are sick or caring for a sick household member.
Notify staff when you plan to implement COVID-19 leave policies.
Note: Direct staff who get sick with COVID-19 symptoms to avoid contact with others and to seek medical advice.
Consider alternatives for event staff and participants who are at increased risk for complications from COVID-19.
Currently, older adults and persons with severe underlying health conditions are considered to be at increased risk for severe illness and complications from COVID-19.
Event organizers can consider reassigning duties for higher-risk staff to have minimal contact with other persons.
People in higher-risk groups should consult with their healthcare provider about attending large events.
Consider providing refunds to event participants who are unable to attend because they are at high risk and/or provide information on alternative viewing options.
Promote messages that discourage people who are sick from attending events.
This could include electronic messages sent to attendees prior to travel to the event as well as messages requesting that people leave events if they begin to have symptoms of COVID-19, which include fever, cough, and shortness of breath.
Attendees should be encouraged to seek medical advice promptly by calling ahead to a doctors office or emergency room to get guidance.
See CDC guidance on what to do when sick with COVID-19.
Note: Use culturally appropriate messages, materials, and resources.
If possible, identify a space that can be used to isolate staff or participants who become ill at the event.
Designate a space for staff and participants who may become sick and cannot leave the event immediately.
Work with partners, such as local hospitals, to create a plan for treating staff and participants who do not live nearby.
Include a plan for separating and caring for vulnerable populations.
If any staff member or participant becomes sick at your event, separate them from others as soon as possible.
Establish procedures to help sick staff or participants leave the event as soon as possible.
Provide them with clean, disposable facemaskspdf icon to wear, if available.
Work with the local public health department and nearby hospitals to care for those who become sick.
If needed, contact emergency services for those who need emergency care.
Public transportation, shared rides, and taxis should be avoided for sick persons, and disposable facemasks should be worn by persons who are sick at all times when in a vehicle.
Read more about preventing the spread of COVID-19 if someone is sick.
Note: Providing a sick staff member or event participant with a disposable facemask to wear does not replace the need for that person to leave as soon as possible, stay home, and seek medical advice.
Wearing a disposable facemask in the workplace or while participating in a large event is not a sufficient infection control measure.
Plan ways to limit in-person contact for staff supporting your events.
Several ways to do this include offering staff the option to telework if they can perform their job duties off-site, using email, and conducting meetings by phone or video conferencing.
Reduce the number of staff needed such as staggering shifts for staff who support essential functions and services during events.
Develop ﬂexible refund policies for participants.
Create refund policies that permit participants the flexibility to stay home when they are sick, need to care for sick household members, or are at high risk for complications from COVID-19.
Identify actions to take if you need to postpone or cancel events.
Work closely with local public health officials to assess local capacities in the area.
During a COVID-19 outbreak, resource limitations among local healthcare systems and/or law enforcement can influence the decision to postpone or cancel your events.
If possible, plan alternative ways for participants to enjoy the events by television, radio, or online.
Stay informed about the local COVID-19 situation.
Get up-to-date information about local COVID-19 activity from public health officials.
Be aware of temporary school dismissals in your area because these may affect event staff.
Note: Early in the outbreak, local public health officials may recommend schools dismiss temporarily.
Update and distribute timely and accurate emergency communication information.
Identify everyone in your chain of communication (for example, event staff, participants, suppliers, vendors, and key community partners and stakeholders) and establish systems for sharing information with them.
Maintain up-to-date contact information for everyone in the chain of communication.
Identify platforms, such as a hotline, automated text messaging, and a website to help disseminate information.
Update key community partners and stakeholders regularly.
Share information about how you and the emergency operations coordinator or planning team for the venues are responding to the outbreak.
Identify and address potential language, cultural, and disability barriers associated with communicating COVID-19 information to event staff and participants.
Information you share should be easily understood by everyone attending the events.
Learn more about reaching people of diverse languages and cultures by visiting: Know Your Audience.
You also can learn more about communicating to staff in a crisis at: Crisis Communications Planexternal icon
Remember, a COVID-19 outbreak could last for a long time.
When public health officials determine that the outbreak has ended in your local community, work with them to identify criteria for scaling back COVID-19 prevention actions at your events.
Base the criteria on slowing of the outbreak in your local area.
If your events were cancelled, work with your venues to reschedule your events.
Evaluate the effectiveness of your emergency operations and communication plans
Meet with the emergency operations coordinator or planning team for your venues to discuss and note lessons learned.
Gather feedback from event staff, participants (if possible), community partners, and stakeholders to improve plans.
Identify any gaps in the plans and any needs you may have for additional resources.
Maintain and expand your planning team.
Look for ways to expand community partnerships.
Identify agencies or partners needed to help you prepare for infectious disease outbreaks in the future and try to add them to your planning team.
Participate in community-wide emergency preparedness activities.
CDC Interim Guidance for Specific Audiences
Interim guidance to prevent spread of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
There is much to learn about the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Based on what is currently known about SARS-CoV-2 and about similar coronaviruses, spread from person-to-person happens most frequently among close contacts (within about 6 feet).
This type of transmission occurs via respiratory droplets.
Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 to persons from surfaces contaminated with the virus has not been documented.
Transmission of coronavirus in general occurs much more commonly through respiratory droplets than through contact with contaminated surfaces.
Current evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2 may remain viable for hours to days on surfaces made from a variety of materials.
Cleaning of visibly dirty surfaces followed by disinfection is a best practice measure for prevention of COVID-19 and other viral respiratory illnesses in election polling locations.
This guidance provides recommendations on the routine cleaning and disinfection of polling location areas and associated voting equipment (e.g pens, voting machines, computers).
It suggests actions that polling station workers can take to reduce the risk of exposure to COVID-19 by limiting the survival of the virus in the environment.
This guidance will be updated if additional information becomes available.
Based on available data, the most important measures to prevent transmission of viruses in crowded public areas include careful and consistent cleaning of ones hands.
Therefore:
Information for Event Planners and Individuals
The Presidents Coronavirus Guidelines for America -- Slow the Spread of Coronavirus (COVID-19) More at Whitehouse.govpdf iconexternal icon.
Spanishpdf iconexternal icon Chinesepdf icon Vietnamesepdf icon Koreanpdf icon
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
Creating an emergency plan for mass gatherings and large community events, such as concerts and sporting events, can help protect the health of your staff, attendees, and the local community.
This planning should include:
Encourage staff and attendees to take everyday preventive actions to help prevent the spread of respiratory illnesses, such as COVID-19.
This includes:
Consult with local public health officials and continually assess, based on current conditions, whether to postpone, cancel, or significantly reduce the number of attendees (if possible) at an event or gathering.
When determining if you should postpone or cancel a large gathering or event, consider the:
Share these resources to help people understand COVID-19 and steps they can take to help protect themselves:
If there is minimal or moderate spread of COVID-19 in the community, CDC recommends cancelling an:
If there is substantial spread of COVID-19 in the community, CDC recommends cancelling events of any size.
See guidance for definitions of minimal, moderate, and substantial spreadpdf iconpdf icon.
If a staff member or attendee becomes sick at your event, separate them from others as soon as possible and until they can go home.
Provide them with clean, disposable facemaskspdf iconpdf icon to wear, if available.
If not available, provide them with a tissue or some other way to cover their coughs and sneezes.
If needed, contact emergency services for those who need emergency care.
Public transportation, shared rides, and taxis should be avoided for sick persons.
Be sure to contact local public health officials regarding the possible case of COVID-19 at your event and how to communicate with staff and attendees about possible exposure to the virus.
Read more about preventing the spread of COVID-19 if someone is sick.
CDC has guidance for cleaning and disinfecting rooms and areas where a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 has visited.
See Environmental Cleaning and Disinfection Recommendations.
If there is minimal or moderate spread of COVID-19 in the community, CDC recommends cancelling an:
If there is substantial spread of COVID-19 in the community, CDC recommends cancelling events of any size.
See page 9 of CDCs Community Mitigation Framework or definitions of minimal, moderate, and substantial spreadpdf iconpdf icon.
Printer friendly version pdf icon1 page
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness that can spread from person to person.
The outbreak first started in China, but cases have been identified in a growing number of other areas, including the United States.
Law enforcement who must make contact with individuals confirmed or suspected to have COVID-19 should follow CDCs Interim Guidance for EMS.
Different styles of PPE may be necessary to perform operational duties.
These alternative styles (i.e.
coveralls) must provide protection that is at least as great as that provided by the minimum amount of PPE recommended.
*If unable to wear a disposable gown or coveralls because it limits access to duty belt and gear, ensure duty belt and gear are disinfected after contact with individual.
For law enforcement personnel performing daily routine activities, the immediate health risk is considered low.
Law enforcement leadership and personnel should follow CDCs Interim General Business Guidance.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2.
Symptoms often include a fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person to person between people who are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet), through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
Some recent studies have suggested that COVID-19 may be spread by people who are not showing symptoms.
It may be possible that people can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or eyes.
However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
Stay informed.
Talk to your employer, supervisor, union representative, or occupational health provider who is responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns.
See these sources for more information:
Older adults and people who have severe underlying medical conditions like heart or lung disease or diabetes seem to be at higher risk for developing more serious complications from COVID-19 illness.
More information on Are you at higher risk for serious illness?
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this interim guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
Revisions were made on March 21, 2020 to reflect the following:
Community- and faith-based organizations (CFBOs), working together with schools, businesses, healthcare systems, and state, local, tribal, and territorial health departments, have an important role in slowing the spread of diseases, especially among high risk populations.
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the transmission and severity of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
Please check the following CDC website periodically for updated interim guidance.
Health officials are working to prevent COVID-19 from entering and spreading in US communities.
CFBOs play an important role in this effort.
In coordination with local health departments, CFBOs can share information about the disease, how it spreads, and who is at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19.
CFBOs should take steps to help prevent the spread of COVID-19 when needed.
CFBOs should review, update, or develop and implement emergency plans for the organization, with special consideration for individuals at increased risk of severe illness.
Organizational emergency plans should complement other community mitigation strategies to protect high risk populations, avoid overwhelming the healthcare system, minimize disruption to essential services, and protect individuals from social stigma and discrimination.
Plans should build on everyday practices (e.g encouraging healthy hygiene practices, cleaning frequently touched surfaces, communicating clearly and regularly).
Strategies should be based on whether a confirmed COVID-19 case has been in your facility, the level of community transmission, characteristics of the community, and the local capacity to implement strategies.
This interim guidance is intended for administrators and leaders of CFBOs – congregations and places of worship (churches, synagogues, mosques, temples, etc.
), voluntary social service agencies and other nonprofit organizations, and community organizations.
This guidance is intended to help CFBOs prevent the transmission of COVID-19 within their facilities and communities.
CFBOs need to be able to react quickly if there is a confirmed COVID-19 case among staff, volunteers, the people they serve, or visitors.
The guidance includes considerations to help administrators and leaders plan for the continuity of services depending on level of community spread of COVID-19.
CFBOs, working together with schools, businesses, healthcare systems and state/territorial and local (and, if applicable, tribal) health departments, have an important role in slowing the spread of diseases, especially among high risk populations.
It is important to realize that government, communities, and individuals must work together to prepare for and respond to COVID-19.
A CFBO is one part of a community, local, regional, and national collaborative effort.
CFBOs often serve those who are most vulnerable, such as older people and those with serious underlying health conditions – like heart disease, lung disease, and diabetes – who are at higher risk of developing severe COVID-19 illness.
This may include members and regular attendees or people they serve as well as persons from the broader community.
CFBOs should be prepared for situations when there is local community transmission of COVID-19 and when a confirmed COVID-19 case has been in the facility, regardless of level of community transmission.
The following diagram summarizes mitigation strategies that may be most appropriate for these situations.
The most important thing to do before community transmission occurs is plan and prepare.
CFBO administrators and leaders should reinforce healthy hygiene practices among their staff, volunteers, members, the people they serve, and visitors.
As the global outbreak evolves, CFBOs should prepare for the possibility of community-level outbreaks.
CFBOs need to be ready if, and when, COVID-19 appears in their communities.
Here are some strategies:
Review, update, and implement emergency operations plans (EOP).
This should be done in collaboration with local health departmentsexternal icon and other relevant partners.
Many CFBOs already have an EOP designed for a wide range or emergencies (e.g natural disasters, fires).
Focus on the components, or annexes, of the plans that address infectious disease outbreaks.
Teach and reinforce healthy hygiene practices.
Monitor and plan for absenteeism.
Require sick staff and volunteers to stay home.
Determine when to cancel or postpone non-essential gatherings and events.
Establish procedures for persons who are sick at the facility.
Create and test communications for staff, volunteers, members, and the people you serve.
Review CDCs guidance for businesses and employers.
Any CFBO should be prepared to close temporarily, regardless of whether there is community transmission, if a person who is a confirmed COVID-19 case has been in the facility.
If this happens, CDC recommends the following procedures:
Coordinate with local health officials.
Once learning of a person with confirmed COVID-19 who has been in the facility, immediately notify local health officials.
These officials will have guidance for administrators and leaders to determine a course of action, which may include tracing contacts of that person.
Implement strategies to continue essential services for the people you serve.
Communicate with staff, volunteers, members, and the people you serve.
Coordinate with local health officials to communicate closure decisions, alterations to services, and the possible COVID-19 exposure.
CFBOs play a vital role in maintaining community morale and cohesion, especially if large gatherings and other community assemblies are cancelled.
People will need to be able to receive timely, reliable information from their religious and community leaders.
Make decisions in consultation with local health officials about extending the closure of, or limited access to, the facility.
This is a strategy to stop or slow the further spread of COVID-19 in communities.
If local health officials report that there is a minimal to moderate level of COVID-19 transmission in the community, CFBOs need to implement additional strategies in response to prevent spread.
These additional strategies include:
Coordinate with local health officials.
This should be a first step in making decisions about responses to the presence of COVID-19 in the community.
Health officials can help a CFBO determine which set of strategies might be most appropriate for the organizations situation.
Continue using strategies from the preparedness phase (when there was no community transmission).
Implement the emergency operations plan, scaling mitigation strategies up or down depending on the evolving local situation.
Be aware of school dismissals and other community-wide mitigation strategies in your area because these may affect your staff and volunteers as well as the needs of members and the people you serve.
Implement multiple social distancing strategies.
Select strategies based on feasibility given the unique space and needs of the organization.
Not all strategies will be appropriate or feasible for all organizations.
Administrators and leaders are encouraged to think creatively about all opportunities to increase the physical space between individuals and limit interactions in large group settings.
Consider ways to accommodate the needs of individuals at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 in all strategies.
Consider alternatives for providing essential services for the people you serve.
Consider focusing your organizations efforts to provide services that are most needed during the emergency, such as mental health, spiritual health, or social services.
Enhanced strategies need to be considered when there is substantial transmission in the local community.
Continue to coordinate with local health officials.
If local health officials have determined there is substantial transmission of COVID-19 within the community, they can provide guidance on the best course of action for CFBOs.
Local public health officials will also provide recommendations for phasing out and ending COVID-19 community mitigation actions at the appropriate time.
Cancel or postpone community and faith-based gatherings of any size.
If the facility is open, determine which other mitigation strategies (of those recommended to be implemented when there is no transmission or minimal to moderate transmission) need to be scaled up and/or extended.
Consider extended closure of the facility or limited access for non-essential services.
This longer-term strategy is intended to slow transmission rates of COVID-19 in the community, particularly when implemented in coordination with other closures in the community.
Remember to implement strategies to ensure continuity of services to the extent possible, while also addressing increased social, emotional, spiritual, physical, and safety needs (e.g meal programs, spiritual and social support), particularly for groups that may be more highly impacted.
Consider how your organization is able to support the local community.
Consider focusing your organizations efforts to provide services that are most needed during the emergency, such as mental health, spiritual health, or social services.
Printer Friendly Version pdf iconPDF – 117 KB
To help your organization prepare for the possible spread of COVID-19, ensure your emergency operations plan includes key COVID-19 prevention strategies and covers groups at increased risk for severe illness.
This includes, but is not limited to, older adults and people of any age with serious underlying medical conditions, such as heart or lung disease or diabetes.
Be sure all staff, volunteers, and members are familiar with your emergency operations plan.
Ensure you know how to contact them with information and updates (such as through text message and websites).
Alert local public health officials about large increases in staff or regular member absenteeism, particularly if absences appear due to respiratory illnesses (such as, the common cold and the flu, which have symptoms similar to COVID-19 (fever, cough, and difficulty breathing).
Read CDCs guidance to learn more about how to get your community- or faith-based organization ready for COVID-19.
CDC also has guidance that covers additional strategies to protect your staff.
The best way to prevent COVID-19 is to avoid being exposed to the virus.
Start by encouraging your staff and members to use everyday preventive actions (such as washing hands often, avoiding close contact with people, and covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue or the inside of the elbow).
Be sure you have supplies on hand (such as such as soap, hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol, tissues, trash baskets) for your staff, volunteers, and those you serve.
CDC has posters with messages you can post in your facility for staff about:
CDC also has information for members, including:
To help limit the spread of the virus, you should also develop flexible sick-leave and telework policies so that staff (and volunteers) can stay home when they are sick, when they need to care for a sick household member, or to care for their children in the event of temporary school dismissals.
You may also consider replacing in-person meetings with conference calls, video conferencing, or web-based seminars and postponing non-essential meetings and travel.
At least once per day, clean and then disinfect surfaces and objects that are touched often.
Read CDC guidance on cleaning and disinfecting to learn more.
This guidance includes cleaning objects and surfaces not ordinarily cleaned daily, for example, doorknobs, light switches, and countertops.
Clean with the cleaners typically used.
Use all cleaning products according to the directions on the label.
For disinfection, most common household disinfectants should be effective.
A list of products that are EPA-approved for use against the virus that causes COVID-19 is available herepdf iconexternal icon.
You can get up-to-date information about local COVID-19 activity by keeping in touch with your local and state public health officialsexternal icon, and keeping up-to-date with the CDC website.
Consult with local public health officials and continually assess current conditions.
Be sure to regularly review the latest recommendations from the White Houseexternal icon and CDC for all types of gatherings.
When determining if you should postpone or cancel a gathering or event, consider the:
Read CDC guidance on mass gatherings and large events.
Leaders should talk to staff and members about their concerns, as well as the potential fears and anxiety that may result from rumors or misinformation.
Be sure to share resources that provide reliable COVID-19 information and speak out to prevent stigma and discrimination.
Consider how your organization is uniquely able to assist the local community.
Determine whether your organization can work with local health departments, if needed, so that your facilities can be used as temporary care facilities; quarantine facilities; or central distribution sites for food, water, supplies, or medicine.
Coordinate with local health officials on ways to ensure care and services for vulnerable populations.
Congregations and organizations with experience working with underserved communities (e.g people who are incarcerated, people who are experiencing homelessness, immigrants, refugees, those with limited English proficiency, single-parent families, public housing residents, migrant-, farm-, and other low-wage workers) can work with local health officials to ensure these groups receive appropriate care and services.
Share these resources to help people understand COVID-19 and steps they can take to help protect themselves:
If there is minimal or moderate spread of COVID-19 in your community, you should:
For more information related to group activities or events, read CDC guidance on mass gatherings and large events.
To find out if your organization should cancel or postpone a group event or activity, read CDC guidance on mass gathering and large events.
If there is substantial spread of COVID-19 in the community, you should:
For more information related to group activities or events, read CDC guidance on community events.
You should first follow the directions of your state and local authorities.
If authorities do not have specific directions related to cancelling or postponing a group event or activity, read CDC guidance on community events.
If you think someone on your staff or one of your members who has been in your facility might be sick with COVID-19 (see COVID-19 symptoms):
CDC has guidance for cleaning and disinfecting rooms and areas where a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 has visited.
See Environmental Cleaning and Disinfection Recommendations.
Community- and faith-based organizations are encouraged to prepare for the possibility of a coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in their communities.
Use this checklist to protect the health of those you serve and staff in your care.
Also, view a handout from HHS that includes recommended preventative practices and FAQs for faith-based and community leaders pdf iconPDF – 917 KBexternal icon.
Update your emergency operations plan with the help of your local public health department, emergency operations coordinator or planning team, and other relevant partners to include COVID-19 planning.
Identify space that can be used to separate sick people if needed.
Develop an emergency communication plan for distributing timely and accurate information to workers and those you serve.
Identify actions to take if you need to temporarily postpone or cancel events, programs, and services, especially for groups at greater risk such as older adults or people with chronic health conditions.
Promote the practice of everyday preventative actions.
Provide COVID-19 prevention supplies at your organization (e.g soap, hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol, tissues, trash baskets, and a couple of disposable facemasks, just in case someone becomes sick during an event).
Plan for staff absences by developing flexible attendance and sick-leave policies, plan for alternative coverage, and monitor and track COVID-19 related staff absences.
Engage with stigmatized groups and speak out against negative behaviors to help counter stigma and discrimination.
If there is COVID-19 in your community:
Stay informed about local COVID-19 information and updates.
Put your emergency operations and communication plans into action.
Communicate with your community members if events and services are changed, postponed, or cancelled.
Emphasize everyday preventive actions through intensified communications with employees and visitors to your organization.
During an event, if someone becomes sick separate them into an isolated room and ask them to leave as soon as possible.
Parks, trails, and open spaces can provide opportunities for physical activity while also providing opportunities for respite, health, and wellness.
Individuals are encouraged to use parks, trails, and open spaces safely as they are able while following current guidance to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
The following offers guidance for the use and administration of local, state, and national parks.
Park administrators should consider displaying posters and signs throughout the park to frequently remind visitors to take steps to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
These messages may include information about:
If possible, restrooms should remain open if a park remains open for public visitation.
If restrooms will be closed, notify visitors ahead of time so they can prepare appropriately.
Ensure that open restrooms are:
Oftentimes restroom facilities without running water, such as portable toilets and vault toilets, are not stocked with hand hygiene products.
Encourage visitors to be prepared to bring their own hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol for use in these facilities.
Proper operation, maintenance, and disinfection (with chlorine or bromine) of swimming pools should kill the virus that causes COVID-19.
During periods of sustained community transmission, park administrators should:
If organized sports activity has been suspended within the park, communicate with sports team coaches that unofficial sports practices are also prohibited within the park.
In general, most organized activities and sports such as basketball, baseball, soccer, and football that are held on park fields, open areas, and courts are not recommended during times in which individuals are encouraged or required to practice social distancing.
These activities and sports typically require coaches and athletes who are not from the same household or living unit to be in close proximity, which increases their potential for exposure to COVID-19.
Park administrators should monitor directives issued at the national, state, and local levels related to limiting the size of gatherings.
These directives can inform decisions about limiting participation for those sports and activities that exceed the maximum number allowed.
Until local public health officials have coordinated with organizers to determine if/when it is safe to participate in such activities, all should be postponed or canceled.
When there is ongoing transmission of COVID-19 in the community where the park is located, consider implementing the following strategies:
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this interim guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
This guidance is intended to provide key actions that local and state health departments, homelessness service systems, housing authorities, emergency planners, healthcare facilities, and homeless outreach services can take to protect people experiencing homelessness from the spread of COVID-19.
People experiencing unsheltered homelessness (those sleeping outside or in places not meant for human habitation) may be at risk for infection when there is community spread of COVID-19.
This interim guidance is intended to support response planning by local and state health departments, homelessness service systems, housing authorities, emergency planners, healthcare facilities, and homeless outreach services.
Homeless shelters and other facilities should also refer to the Interim Guidance for Homeless Shelters.
Community and faith-based organizations can refer to the Interim Guidance for Community and Faith-based Organizations for other information related to their staff and organizations.
COVID-19 is caused by a new coronavirus.
There is much to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features of the disease.
Everyone can do their part to help plan, prepare, and respond to this emerging public health threat.
Lack of housing contributes to poor health outcomes, and linkage to permanent housing should continue to be a priority.
In the context of COVID-19, the risks associated with sleeping outdoors in an encampment setting are different than with staying indoors in a congregate setting such as an emergency shelter or other congregate living facility.
Outdoor settings may allow people to increase distance between themselves and others.
However, sleeping outdoors often does not provide protection from the environment, quick access to hygiene and sanitation facilities, or connection to healthcare.
The balance of risks should be considered for each individual experiencing unsheltered homelessness.
Reaching and protecting people experiencing unsheltered homelessness during the COVID-19 outbreak will require coordination across several local sectors.
To prevent negative outcomes from lack of services, community leaders should continue activities that protect people experiencing homelessness, including supporting continuity of homeless services, healthcare, behavioral health services, food pantries, and linkages to permanent housing.
Plans need to be clearly communicated to all stakeholders.
Provide straightforward communications to people sleeping outside in the appropriate language.
Identify people who are influential in the community who can help communicate with others.
Post signs in strategic locations to provide information on hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, and cough etiquette.
Request up-to-date contact information for each person.
Some people who are experiencing unsheltered homelessness may be at higher risk of moderate to severe disease because of certain conditions.
Pay particular attention to preventing disease among these individuals.
Local partners should plan for where individuals and families with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 experiencing unsheltered homelessness can safely stay.
These should include places where people who are confirmed to be positive and those awaiting test results can be isolated.
Additionally, if a person needs to be hospitalized, a plan should be in place for how they will safely recover after discharge.
Ideally, these individuals will be housed for the duration necessary, as outlined in the recommendations for discontinuation of isolation.
Isolation housing could be units designated by local authorities or shelters determined to have capacity to sufficiently isolate these individuals.
If medical care is not necessary and if no other options are available, advise the individual on how to isolate themselves while efforts are underway to provide additional support.
In each scenario, identify how to safely transport patients to and from healthcare and housing facilities.
Behavioral health teams should be involved in the planning for these sites to facilitate continued access to support for people with substance abuse or mental health disorders.
In some situations, for example due to severe untreated mental illness, an individual may not be able to comply with isolation recommendations.
In these cases, community leaders should consult local health authorities to determine alternative options.
A local surge in the need for medical care may require jurisdictions to establish isolation sites and alternate care sites (ACS) where patients with COVID-19 can remain for the duration of their isolation period.
These are typically established in non-traditional environments, such as converted hotels or mobile field medical units.
Isolation sites are intended to be locations for patients who do not require medical care, while ACS are intended be locations for patients who require some degree of medical care.
Isolation sites can be used for people with COVID-19 who are currently experiencing homelessness and cannot be discharged to a congregate setting.
For more information, please see Alternate Care Sites and Isolation Sites.
When COVID-19 is spreading in your community, assign outreach staff who are at higher risk for severe illness to other duties.
Advise outreach staff who will be continuing outreach activities on how to protect themselves and their clients from COVID-19 in the course of their normal duties.
Instruct staff to:
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this interim guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
This guidance is intended to provide key actions that local and state health departments, homelessness service systems, housing authorities, emergency planners, healthcare facilities, and homeless outreach services can take to protect people experiencing homelessness from the spread of COVID-19.
People experiencing unsheltered homelessness (those sleeping outside or in places not meant for human habitation) may be at risk for infection when there is community spread of COVID-19.
This interim guidance is intended to support response planning by local and state health departments, homelessness service systems, housing authorities, emergency planners, healthcare facilities, and homeless outreach services.
Homeless shelters and other facilities should also refer to the Interim Guidance for Homeless Shelters.
Community and faith-based organizations can refer to the Interim Guidance for Community and Faith-based Organizations for other information related to their staff and organizations.
COVID-19 is caused by a new coronavirus.
There is much to learn about the transmissibility, severity, and other features of the disease.
Everyone can do their part to help plan, prepare, and respond to this emerging public health threat.
Lack of housing contributes to poor health outcomes, and linkage to permanent housing should continue to be a priority.
In the context of COVID-19, the risks associated with sleeping outdoors in an encampment setting are different than with staying indoors in a congregate setting such as an emergency shelter or other congregate living facility.
Outdoor settings may allow people to increase distance between themselves and others.
However, sleeping outdoors often does not provide protection from the environment, quick access to hygiene and sanitation facilities, or connection to healthcare.
The balance of risks should be considered for each individual experiencing unsheltered homelessness.
Reaching and protecting people experiencing unsheltered homelessness during the COVID-19 outbreak will require coordination across several local sectors.
To prevent negative outcomes from lack of services, community leaders should continue activities that protect people experiencing homelessness, including supporting continuity of homeless services, healthcare, behavioral health services, food pantries, and linkages to permanent housing.
Plans need to be clearly communicated to all stakeholders.
Provide straightforward communications to people sleeping outside in the appropriate language.
Identify people who are influential in the community who can help communicate with others.
Post signs in strategic locations to provide information on hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, and cough etiquette.
Request up-to-date contact information for each person.
Some people who are experiencing unsheltered homelessness may be at higher risk of moderate to severe disease because of certain conditions.
Pay particular attention to preventing disease among these individuals.
Local partners should plan for where individuals and families with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 experiencing unsheltered homelessness can safely stay.
These should include places where people who are confirmed to be positive and those awaiting test results can be isolated.
Additionally, if a person needs to be hospitalized, a plan should be in place for how they will safely recover after discharge.
Ideally, these individuals will be housed for the duration necessary, as outlined in the recommendations for discontinuation of isolation.
Isolation housing could be units designated by local authorities or shelters determined to have capacity to sufficiently isolate these individuals.
If medical care is not necessary and if no other options are available, advise the individual on how to isolate themselves while efforts are underway to provide additional support.
In each scenario, identify how to safely transport patients to and from healthcare and housing facilities.
Behavioral health teams should be involved in the planning for these sites to facilitate continued access to support for people with substance abuse or mental health disorders.
In some situations, for example due to severe untreated mental illness, an individual may not be able to comply with isolation recommendations.
In these cases, community leaders should consult local health authorities to determine alternative options.
A local surge in the need for medical care may require jurisdictions to establish isolation sites and alternate care sites (ACS) where patients with COVID-19 can remain for the duration of their isolation period.
These are typically established in non-traditional environments, such as converted hotels or mobile field medical units.
Isolation sites are intended to be locations for patients who do not require medical care, while ACS are intended be locations for patients who require some degree of medical care.
Isolation sites can be used for people with COVID-19 who are currently experiencing homelessness and cannot be discharged to a congregate setting.
For more information, please see Alternate Care Sites and Isolation Sites.
When COVID-19 is spreading in your community, assign outreach staff who are at higher risk for severe illness to other duties.
Advise outreach staff who will be continuing outreach activities on how to protect themselves and their clients from COVID-19 in the course of their normal duties.
Instruct staff to:
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this interim guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
A revision was made on 4/21/2020 to reflect the following:
People experiencing homelessness are at risk for infection during community spread of COVID-19.
This interim guidance is intended to support response planning by emergency management officials, public health authorities, and homeless service providers, including overnight emergency shelters, day shelters, and meal service providers.
COVID-19 is caused by a new coronavirus.
We are learning about how it spreads, how severe it is, and other features of the disease.
Transmission of COVID-19 in your community could cause illness among people experiencing homelessness, contribute to an increase in emergency shelter usage, and/or lead to illness and absenteeism among homeless service provider staff.
Early and sustained action to slow the spread of COVID-19 will keep staff and volunteers healthy, and help your organization maintain normal operations.
Planning and response to COVID-19 transmission among people experiencing homelessness requires a whole communityexternal icon approach, which means that you are involving partners in the development of your response planning, and that everyones roles and responsibilities are clear.
Table 1 outlines some of the activities and key partners to consider for a whole-community approach.
Table 1: Using a community-wide approach to prepare for COVID-19 among people experiencing homelessness
Depending on resources and staff availability, non-group housing options (such as hotels/motels) that have individual rooms should be considered for the overflow, quarantine, and protective housing sites.
In addition, plan for how to connect clients to housing opportunities after they have completed their stay in these temporary sites.
Have supplies on hand for staff, volunteers, and those you serve, such as:
The following is a screening tool that can be used to identify people with symptoms that indicate they might have a respiratory infection.
Although not every person who has respiratory infection symptoms will have coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), using a tool may be helpful in identifying people who may need medical care.
If someone screens positive for symptoms, they should be directed to where they can stay, either within the shelter or at another location, according to a predesignated plan developed with the local Continuum of Care (CoC), public health department, and community leadership.
If the client has a fever OR a new/worsening cough:
Use standard shelter protocols for medical emergencies.
Temporal thermometers use an infrared scanner to measure the temperature of the temporal artery in the forehead.
Temperature takers should keep as much distance from clients as they can, wash their hands with soap and water or use alcohol-based hand sanitizer (at least 60% alcohol) regularly, and use gloves if available.
People who are homeless are at risk of COVID-19.
Homeless services are often provided in congregate settings, which could facilitate the spread of infection.
Because many people who are homeless are older adults or have underlying medical conditions, they may also be at higher risk for severe disease than the general population.
Health departments and healthcare facilities should be aware that people who are homeless are a particularly vulnerable group.
If possible, identifying non-congregate settings where those at highest risk can stay may help protect them from COVID-19.
Many of the recommendations to prevent COVID-19 may be difficult for a person experiencing homelessness to do.
Although it may not be possible to avoid certain crowded locations (such as shelters), people who are homeless should try to avoid other crowded public settings and public transportation.
If possible, they should use take-away options for food.
As is true for everyone, they should maintain a distance of about 6 feet (two arms length) from other people.
They also should wash their hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds as often as possible, and cover their coughs and sneezes.
Any person experiencing homelessness with symptoms consistent with COVID-19 (fever, cough, or shortness of breath) should alert their service providers (such as case managers, shelter staff, and other care providers).
These staff will help the individual understand how to isolate themselves and identify options for medical care as needed.
If they meet criteria for testing, people experiencing homelessness will access COVID-19 testing through a healthcare provider.
Local public health and healthcare facilities need to determine the best location for this testing in coordination with homeless healthcare clinics and street medicine clinics.
Those with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 should stay in a place where they can best be isolated from other people to prevent spreading the infection.
Local health departments, housing authorities, homeless service systems and healthcare facilities should plan to identify locations to isolate those with known or suspected COVID-19 until they meet the criteria to end isolation.
Isolation housing could be units designated by local authorities or shelters determined to have capacity to sufficiently isolate these people.
If no other options are available, homeless service providers  should plan for how they can help people isolate themselves while efforts are underway to provide additional support.
Please see the Interim Guidance for Homeless Service Providers and Interim Guidance for People Experiencing Unsheltered Homelessness for more information.
Homeless service providers can accept donations during community spread of COVID-19, but general infection control precautions should be taken.
Request that donors not donate if they are sick.
Set up donation drop-off points to encourage social distancing between shelter workers and those donating.
According to usual procedures, launder donated clothing, sheets, towels, or other fabrics on high heat settings, and disinfect items that are nonporous, such as items made of plastic.
Food donations should be shelf-stable, and shelter staff should take usual food-related infection prevention precautions.
For more information about COVID-19 and food, see the Food and Drug Administrations website on Food Safety and COVID-19external icon.
For further information on cleaning and disinfection, see here.
Homeless shelters can screen clients for symptoms of respiratory infections.
Clients who have symptoms may or may not have COVID-19.
Make sure they have a separate place they can safely stay within the shelter or at an alternate site in coordination with local health authorities.
An on-site nurse or other clinical staff can help with clinical assessments.
Notify the designated medical facility and personnel to transfer clients that the client might have COVID-19.
Homeless shelters serve a critical function in our communities.
Shelters should stay open unless homeless service providers, health departments, and housing authorities have determined together that a shelter needs to close.
Connecting people to stable housing should continue to be a priority.
However, if individual housing options are not available, allow people who are living in encampments to remain where they are.
Encourage people living in encampments to increase space between people and provide hygiene resources in accordance with the Interim Guidance for People Experiencing Unsheltered Homelessness.
Printer Friendly Versionpdf icon
Many people living in retirement communities and independent living facilities (ILF) are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19 because they
A retirement community or independent living facility is a residential or housing community that is usually age-restricted (e.g aged 55 and older) with residents who are partially or fully retired and can generally care for themselves without regular nursing or other routine medical assistance.
Communal facilities, community activities, meals, transportation, and socialization opportunities may be provided.
Different types of independent housing with support services for older adults include:
This guidance is for owners, administrators, operators, workers, volunteers, visitors, and residents of retirement communities and ILF that are not healthcare facilities.
Guidance for long-term care facilities (LTCF) that offer medical services, i.e nursing homes, skilled nursing facilities, assisted living facilities, and adult day care programs to older adults can be found here.
Additionally, a checklistpdf icon is available for use by long-term care facilities and assisted living facilities to assess and improve their preparedness for responding to COVID-19.
Retirement communities and ILF can adapt this checklist to meet their needs and circumstances.
Information relevant to retirement communities and ILF can also be found in guidance documents  for older adults and people with serious chronic medical conditions and for community-based organizations.
COVID-19 is being increasingly reported in communities across the United States.
It is likely that the novel coronavirus is circulating in most communities even if cases have not yet been reported.
Residents in retirement communities and ILF are considered to be at higher risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes because of older age and because they may have underlying health conditions, such as chronic heart disease, diabetes, or lung disease.
They also may be at higher risk of getting and spreading the virus because of community characteristics, such as frequent social activities, and shared dining facilities and communal spaces.
Guidance specific to retirement and independent living communities can help the residents, and those who help serve them, slow the spread of the virus and prevent serious illness.
This guidance takes into account that residents in retirement communities generally care for themselves.
Retirement communities and ILF can also consider adopting the more stringent recommendations for long-term care facilities or nursing homes, especially if they are a continuing care retirement community that includes a long-term care facility.
Either way, retirement community and ILF owners, administrators, or operators have an important role, working together with residents, workers, volunteers, and the local health departments in slowing the spread of diseases and helping ensure residents are safe.
Owners, administrators, operators and can help slow the spreading of the virus and prevent severe illness within communities by following the guidance below.
Cancel all public or non-essential group activities and events.
For essential group activities that cannot be canceled, implementing the following social distancing measures can help:
Because canceling social interaction may increase risk of adverse mental health outcomes, particularly during a stressful event of a disease outbreak, administrators can provide information to help  support residents in managing stress and anxiety during this COVID-19 outbreak.
Clean and disinfect all common areas and shared facilities.
Inform residents, workers, volunteers, and visitors about COVID-19.
Sharing the facts about COVID-19 and ensuring that residents, workers, volunteers, and visitors are aware of the symptoms of COVID-19, health conditions that may put them at higher risk of becoming very sick with COVID-19, its health risks, and what to do if they become ill can make an outbreak less stressful and help prevent or slow the spread of disease.
Administrators can support residents who have no or limited access to the internet by
Workers, contractors (such as barbers, hairdressers, sitters, and housekeepers), and volunteers providing care in multiple homes or facilities can serve as a source of coronavirus transmission between residences in these facilities.
These persons should be advised to limit the number of people they interact with who are at higherrisk of serious complications from COVID-19, and retain distance of &gt;6 feet when interacting.
Help residents establish a buddy system to ensure they stay connected.
Owners, administrators, and operators of retirement communities and ILF may want to identify residents who have unique medical needs (including behavioral health needs), and access and functional needs to encourage them to develop a plan if they or their primary caretaker(s) become ill.
They can assist in finding volunteers to assist residents who may need extra assistance in getting the medical help they need and train these volunteers in following personal protective measures.
These volunteers should not be persons who are at higher risk for serious illness from COVID-19.
Volunteers can also consider checking up on residents via electronic means if appropriate.
Consider limiting the number of non-essential visitors.
Retirement communities and ILF may want to consider limiting visitation (e.g maximum of one visitor per resident per day, restricting visitors with recent travel and those with symptoms of COVID-19), especially in common areas, to workers, volunteers, and visitors who are essential to preserving the health, including mental health, well-being, and safety of residents.
Advise persons that maintaining social distancing (at least 6 feet) can help reduce coronavirus transmission.
Screen, when possible, and advise workers and essential volunteers.
When possible, administrators may want to consider screening workers and essential volunteers who will be interacting with residents for signs and symptoms of COVID-19.
This includes actively taking each persons temperature using a no-touch thermometer, and asking whether or not the person is experiencing shortness of breath or has a cough.
They should be advised that if they develop fever or symptoms of respiratory infection while at work, they should immediately put on a facemask, inform their supervisor, and leave the workplace.
Follow guidance for businesses and employers
This guidance also can be helpful for owners, administrators, and operators of retirement communities and ILF and is found here.
It includes:
Residents can follow the recommendations for persons at higher-risk of COVID-19 to protect themselves and others:
Residents can follow the recommendations for persons at higher-risk of COVID-19 to protect themselves and others:
Additionally, they can avoid close contact:
Establish a buddy system to ensure they stay connected.
Residents can seek out a buddy who will regularly check on them (using preferably non-face-to-face communication) and help care for them if they get sick.
This person cannot be a person who is at higher risk of complications if they become ill with COVID-19.
Ensure continuity of the regular care and medical services they receive.
Residents can work with their primary caretakers to identify alternative caretakers to ensure continuity of care should there be any interruptions to the regular services they receive.
Telemedicine services may be available to them.
They can work with their medical providers to determine if any elective procedures or non-emergent services can be delayed without negatively impacting their health.
They can ask their medical providers if they have a formal telehealth system for their regular appointments and, if not, ask if they can still communicate by telephone (instead of visits) to reduce the number of face-to-face interactions.
Have medication and supplies on hand.
Residents may want to consult with their healthcare providers and, if possible, plan to keep an extra supply of their regular prescriptions.
Mail-order medications also could be considered as an alternative for those unable to get longer supplies of medication.
They can ensure that they have an adequate supply of food and everyday essentials in their homes should a disruption occur for an extended period.
Keep their homes clean and disinfected.
It is important that residents keep their homes clean and disinfected by following these instructions.
If they become ill or if they are caring for someone who is ill, they can follow the guidance found here.
There are many ways volunteer or visitors can reduce the spread of illness:
Avoid entering the facility, the premises, or private residences unless your presence is essential to preserving the health, including mental health, well-being, and safety of residents.
Follow personal protective measures found here and the recommendations set forth by the facility they are visiting.
Maintain social distance of at least six feet from residents can reduce transmission.
Do not visit if you recently had contact with persons who have symptoms of COVID-19 or if you recently traveled.
Most importantly, do not enter the retirement community or ILF if you are sick.
Avoid large groups and travel, especially on planes and cruise ships.
If you, as a volunteer, regularly visit the retirement community and ILF, consider taking greater precaution to protect the residents because they are higher-risk persons.
These precautions include avoiding large group gatherings and crowds, delaying non-essential travel including plane trips, and avoiding embarking on cruise ships.
Volunteers and visitors who have recently traveled should avoid visiting the retirement community and ILF.
Watch for symptoms of illness and follow the recommended steps if you get sick.
If you develop respiratory illness symptoms while at the retirement community or ILF, immediately put on a facemask when possible, leave if possible, self-isolate, and notify the residents you visited and administrators.
If you were there with a volunteer organization, notify the organization.
Additional guidance on what you can do if you get sick can be found here.
As a worker, you can follow the same recommendations as for volunteers and visitors, plus:
Follow standard infection prevention and control practices, basic personal protective recommendations and any other site- and task-specific infection prevention and control measures implemented by their employer.
Maintain social distance of at least six feet from residents whenever possible.
Outside of work, avoid contact with persons who have symptoms of COVID-19.
Watch for symptoms of illness and follow the recommended steps if you get sick.
Stay home if you are sick and notify your supervisors if you become sick outside of work hours.
If you become sick while at the facility or on the premises, put on a facemask, leave immediately, and notify your supervisor.
Additional guidance on what you can do if you get sick can be found here.
If a person with COVID-19 resides in or recently has been to a retirement community or ILF, CDC recommends the following additional measures:
Owners, administrators and operators can take the following additional measures to help prevent or slow further spread of COVID-19:
Local health officials will help determine the appropriate course of action for risk assessment and public health management in the facility or community.
Communicate with residents, workers, volunteers, and visitors.
In coordination with local health officials, communicate the possible COVID-19 exposure to all residents and workers, volunteers, and visitors.
This can be done by placing signage in common areas and entrances/exists and by letter to all residents.
Residents could be advised to inform their recent personal visitors of potential exposure.
Ask residents to self-monitor for 14 days and take action, if sick.
Self-monitoring means a person takes his/her temperature twice a day and pays attention to cough or difficulty breathing.
If a resident feels feverish or their temperature is 100.4°F/38°C or higher, they have a cough, or difficulty breathing during the self-monitoring period, the following actions will help prevent spreading further illness:
Clean and disinfect thoroughly.
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
If a COVID-19 outbreak happens in your community, it could last for a long time.
Depending on the severity of the outbreak, public health officials might recommend community actions to reduce exposures to COVID-19.
These actions can help slow the spread of COVID-19 and reduce the impact of disease.
If you are an older adult or someone who has severe chronic medical conditions such as heart or lung disease, or diabetes, you are at higher risk for more serious COVID-19 illness.
It is very important for you to take steps to stay healthy.
Stay informed and up to date with your local news for COVID-19 updates.
Take everyday actions before, during, and after the event to protect yourself and others:
Make a plan for if you get sick:
Call your doctor about checking for symptoms that might be COVID-19.
Stay in touch with others by phone or e-mail.
You might need to ask for help from friends, family, neighbors, community health workers, etc.
if you become sick.
Seek out a buddy who will check on and help care for you if you become sick.
Have a list of your daily medicationpdf icon and time of day you take them, so a caregiver will be able to help you if you get sick.
Determine who can provide you with care if your caregiver gets sick.
Make sure you have enough supplies
Contact your doctor to ask about getting extra medications (at least a 30 day supply) to have on hand in case there is an outbreak of COVID-19 in your community and you need to stay home for a few weeks.
If you cannot pick up extra medications, consider using mail-order.
Be sure you have over-the-counter medicines and medical supplies (e.g tissues) to treat fever and other symptoms.
Many older adults will be able to recover from COVID-19 at home.
Have enough household items and groceries so that you will be comfortable staying home for a few weeks.
Continue to take everyday steps to stay healthy: wash your hands often, do not touch your face, avoid sick people and crowds, and disinfect surfaces.
Stay home as much as possible.
Avoid crowds as much as possible.
Consider steps you can take to stay away from other people.
This is especially important for people who are at higher risk of getting very sick.
Pay attention to your local news and follow the steps from your local health officials.
Continue to take everyday steps to stay healthy: wash your hands often, do not touch your face, avoid sick people and crowds, and disinfect surfaces.
Stay home as much as possible.
If you must leave your house
Avoid crowds as much as possible
When you go out in public, keep away from others who are sick, limit close contact, and wash your hands often.
Consider steps you can take to stay away from other people.
This is especially important for people who are at higher risk of getting very sick.
Pay attention to your health: If you develop COVID-19 symptoms including, fever, cough, and trouble breathing, call your doctor.
Watch for symptoms and emergency warning signs
Know when to get emergency help
Community preparedness planning for COVID-19 should include older adults and people with chronic illness and disabilities, and the organizations that support them in their communities, to ensure their needs are taken into consideration.
Assisted-living facilities, long-term care facilities, continuing care retirement communities, and independent living facilities
Be vigilant to prevent the introduction and spread of COVID-19.
Screen staff and visitors for symptoms of COVID-19, cough, fever, or difficulty breathing.
Identify alternatives, such as telehealth, to ensure residents continue to receive care in the event regular services are disrupted.
Identify individuals who may have unique medical, access, and functional needs.
Work with them to develop a plan if they or their caretakers become ill.
Plan for the possibility that usual services may be disrupted.
This includes services provided by hospitals and other healthcare facilities, banks, stores, restaurants, government offices, and the post office.
Plan alternative ways for residents to socially interact, including replacing in-person social meetings with video or telephone, or plan to meet in small groups in open outdoor spaces while maintaining a distance of at least 6 feet between persons.
Stagger meals and activities.
Keep your community informed about COVID-19.
Consider informing residents using printed materials, such as easy-to-understand handouts and by high-visibility posters in high traffic locations.
Also implement video resources if possible.
Continue to take everyday steps to stay health: wash hands often, avoid touching your face, avoid sick people and crowds, and disinfect surfaces.
Have a COVID-19 plan for yourself.
Review your loved ones COVID-19 plan
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
Encourage residents and staff to take everyday preventive actions to prevent the spread of respiratory illnesses.
Actions include staying home when sick; appropriately covering coughs and sneezes; cleaning and then disinfecting frequently touched surfaces; and washing hands often with soap and water.
Administrators should take the following actions to prevent a COVID-19 outbreak in their community or facility:
Share resources with the community to help them understand COVID-19 and steps they can take to protect themselves:
Routinely clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces (e.g doorknobs, light switches, countertops) with cleaners that you typically use.
Use all cleaning products according to the directions on the label.
Practice strict infection control procedures if there is a case in your facility.
Follow CDCs Cleaning and Disinfection Recommendations for Communities.
Ask residents to actively monitor (at least daily) for COVID-19 symptoms, including fever and respiratory symptoms (shortness of breath, new or change in cough).
Administrators should work with local health authorities to establish procedures for those who become sick.
Sick residents should avoid contact with individuals who are healthy.
If you think someone may have COVID-19, ask them to self-isolate and you should contact local health officials.
Work with local health authorities to communicate the possible exposure to residents, staff, and visitors.
Clean and disinfect all shared facilities and high-touch surfaces.
Limit visitors to essential staff  and visitors.
Staff and, when possible, visitors should be screened for signs and symptoms of COVID-19 before entering the facility.
Residents will need to actively monitor their health for COVID-19 symptoms.
Cancel group activities.
Residences that become ill should be advised to call the medical facility in advance of their visit.
See CDCs full interim guidance for more details.
Printer friendly versionpdf icon
PowerPoint Presentation: Managing COVID-19 in Correctional and Detention Facilities pdf icon25 pages, 1 MB
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the transmission and severity of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) as of the date of posting, March 23, 2020.
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
Please check the CDC website periodically for updated interim guidance.
This document provides interim guidance specific for correctional facilities and detention centers during the outbreak of COVID-19, to ensure continuation of essential public services and protection of the health and safety of incarcerated and detained persons, staff, and visitors.
Recommendations may need to be revised as more information becomes available.
This document is intended to provide guiding principles for healthcare and non-healthcare administrators of correctional and detention facilities (including but not limited to federal and state prisons, local jails, and detention centers), law enforcement agencies that have custodial authority for detained populations (i.e US Immigration and Customs Enforcement and US Marshals Service), and their respective health departments, to assist in preparing for potential introduction, spread, and mitigation of COVID-19 in their facilities.
In general, the document uses terminology referring to correctional environments but can also be applied to civil and pre-trial detention settings.
This guidance will not necessarily address every possible custodial setting and may not use legal terminology specific to individual agencies authorities or processes.
The guidance may need to be adapted based on individual facilities physical space, staffing, population, operations, and other resources and conditions.
Facilities should contact CDC or their state, local, territorial, and/or tribal public health department if they need assistance in applying these principles or addressing topics that are not specifically covered in this guidance.
Correctional and detention facilities can include custody, housing, education, recreation, healthcare, food service, and workplace components in a single physical setting.
The integration of these components presents unique challenges for control of COVID-19 transmission among incarcerated/detained persons, staff, and visitors.
Consistent application of specific preparation, prevention, and management measures can help reduce the risk of transmission and severe disease from COVID-19.
CDC has issued separate COVID-19 guidance addressing healthcare infection control and clinical care of COVID-19 cases as well as close contacts of cases in community-based settings.
Where relevant, community-focused guidance documents are referenced in this document and should be monitored regularly for updates, but they may require adaptation for correctional and detention settings.
This guidance document provides additional recommended best practices specifically for correctional and detention facilities.
At this time, different facility types (e.g prison vs. jail) and sizes are not differentiated.
Administrators and agencies should adapt these guiding principles to the specific needs of their facility.
The guidance below includes detailed recommendations on the following topics related to COVID-19 in correctional and detention settings:
Close contact of a COVID-19 case – In the context of COVID-19, an individual is considered a close contact if they a) have been within approximately 6 feet of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time or b) have had direct contact with infectious secretions from a COVID-19 case (e.g have been coughed on).
Close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a common space with a COVID-19 case.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk, as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Cohorting – Cohorting refers to the practice of isolating multiple laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 cases together as a group, or quarantining close contacts of a particular case together as a group.
Ideally, cases should be isolated individually, and close contacts should be quarantined individually.
However, some correctional facilities and detention centers do not have enough individual cells to do so and must consider cohorting as an alternative.
See Quarantine and Medical Isolation sections below for specific details about ways to implement cohorting to minimize the risk of disease spread and adverse health outcomes.
Community transmission of COVID-19 – Community transmission of COVID-19 occurs when individuals acquire the disease through contact with someone in their local community, rather than through travel to an affected location.
Once community transmission is identified in a particular area, correctional facilities and detention centers are more likely to start seeing cases inside their walls.
Facilities should consult with local public health departments if assistance is needed in determining how to define local community in the context of COVID-19 spread.
However, because all states have reported cases, all facilities should be vigilant for introduction into their populations.
Confirmed vs.
Suspected COVID-19 case – A confirmed case has received a positive result from a COVID-19 laboratory test, with or without symptoms.
A suspected case shows symptoms of COVID-19 but either has not been tested or is awaiting test results.
If test results are positive, a suspected case becomes a confirmed case.
Incarcerated/detained persons – For the purpose of this document, incarcerated/detained persons refers to persons held in a prison, jail, detention center, or other custodial setting where these guidelines are generally applicable.
The term includes those who have been sentenced (i.e in prisons) as well as those held for pre-trial (i.e jails) or civil purposes (i.e, detention centers).
Although this guidance does not specifically reference individuals in every type of custodial setting (e.g juvenile facilities, community confinement facilities), facility administrators can adapt this guidance to apply to their specific circumstances as needed.
Medical Isolation – Medical isolation refers to confining a confirmed or suspected COVID-19 case (ideally to a single cell with solid walls and a solid door that closes), to prevent contact with others and to reduce the risk of transmission.
Medical isolation ends when the individual meets pre-established clinical and/or testing criteria for release from isolation, in consultation with clinical providers and public health officials (detailed in guidance below).
In this context, isolation does NOT refer to punitive isolation for behavioral infractions within the custodial setting.
Staff are encouraged to use the term medical isolation to avoid confusion.
Quarantine – Quarantine refers to the practice of confining individuals who have had close contact with a COVID-19 case to determine whether they develop symptoms of the disease.
Quarantine for COVID-19 should last for a period of 14 days.
Ideally, each quarantined individual would be quarantined in a single cell with solid walls and a solid door that closes.
If symptoms develop during the 14-day period, the individual should be placed under medical isolation and evaluated for COVID-19.
If symptoms do not develop, movement restrictions can be lifted, and the individual can return to their previous residency status within the facility.
Social Distancing – Social distancing is the practice of increasing the space between individuals and decreasing the frequency of contact to reduce the risk of spreading a disease (ideally to maintain at least 6 feet between all individuals, even those who are asymptomatic).
Social distancing strategies can be applied on an individual level (e.g avoiding physical contact), a group level (e.g canceling group activities where individuals will be in close contact), and an operational level (e.g rearranging chairs in the dining hall to increase distance between them).
Although social distancing is challenging to practice in correctional and detention environments, it is a cornerstone of reducing transmission of respiratory diseases such as COVID-19.
Staff – In this document, staff refers to all public sector employees as well as those working for a private contractor within a correctional facility (e.g private healthcare or food service).
Except where noted, staff does not distinguish between healthcare, custody, and other types of staff including private facility operators.
Symptoms – Symptoms of COVID-19 include fever, cough, and shortness of breath.
Like other respiratory infections, COVID-19 can vary in severity from mild to severe.
When severe, pneumonia, respiratory failure, and death are possible.
COVID-19 is a novel disease, therefore the full range of signs and symptoms, the clinical course of the disease, and the individuals and populations most at risk for disease and complications are not yet fully understood.
Monitor the CDC website for updates on these topics.
Although many large facilities such as prisons and some jails usually employ onsite healthcare staff and have the capacity to evaluate incarcerated/detained persons for potential illness within a dedicated healthcare space, many smaller facilities do not.
Some of these facilities have access to on-call healthcare staff or providers who visit the facility every few days.
Others have neither onsite healthcare capacity nor onsite medical isolation/quarantine space and must transfer ill patients to other correctional or detention facilities or local hospitals for evaluation and care.
The majority of the guidance below is designed to be applied to any correctional or detention facility, either as written or with modifications based on a facilitys individual structure and resources.
However, topics related to healthcare evaluation and clinical care of confirmed and suspected COVID-19 cases and their close contacts may not apply directly to facilities with limited or no onsite healthcare services.
It will be especially important for these types of facilities to coordinate closely with their state, local, tribal, and/or territorial health department when they encounter confirmed or suspected cases among incarcerated/detained persons or staff, in order to ensure effective medical isolation and quarantine, necessary medical evaluation and care, and medical transfer if needed.
The guidance makes note of strategies tailored to facilities without onsite healthcare where possible.
Note that all staff in any sized facility, regardless of the presence of onsite healthcare services, should observe guidance on recommended PPE in order to ensure their own safety when interacting with confirmed and suspected COVID-19 cases.
Facilities should make contingency plans for the likely event of PPE shortages during the COVID-19 pandemic.
COVID-19 Guidance for Correctional Facilities
Guidance for correctional and detention facilities is organized into 3 sections: Operational Preparedness, Prevention, and Management of COVID-19.
Recommendations across these sections can be applied simultaneously based on the progress of the outbreak in a particular facility and the surrounding community.
Administrators can plan and prepare for COVID-19 by ensuring that all persons in the facility know the symptoms of COVID-19 and how to respond if they develop symptoms.
Other essential actions include developing contingency plans for reduced workforces due to absences, coordinating with public health and correctional partners, and communicating clearly with staff and incarcerated/detained persons about these preparations and how they may temporarily alter daily life.
Cases of COVID-19 have been documented in all 50 US states.
Correctional and detention facilities can prevent introduction of COVID-19 from the community and reduce transmission if it is already inside by reinforcing good hygiene practices among incarcerated/detained persons, staff, and visitors (including increasing access to soap and paper towels), intensifying cleaning/disinfection practices, and implementing social distancing strategies.
Because many individuals infected with COVID-19 do not display symptoms, the virus could be present in facilities before cases are identified.
Both good hygiene practices and social distancing are critical in preventing further transmission.
NOTE: Suspending visitation would be done in the interest of incarcerated/detained persons physical health and the health of the general public.
However, visitation is important to maintain mental health.
If visitation is suspended, facilities should explore alternative ways for incarcerated/detained persons to communicate with their families, friends, and other visitors in a way that is not financially burdensome for them.
See above suggestions for promoting non-contact visits.
If there has been a suspected COVID-19 case inside the facility (among incarcerated/detained persons, staff, or visitors who have recently been inside), begin implementing Management strategies while test results are pending.
Essential Management strategies include placing cases and individuals with symptoms under medical isolation, quarantining their close contacts, and facilitating necessary medical care, while observing relevant infection control and environmental disinfection protocols and wearing recommended PPE.
NOTE: Some recommendations below apply primarily to facilities with onsite healthcare capacity.
Facilities without onsite healthcare capacity, or without sufficient space to implement effective medical isolation, should coordinate with local public health officials to ensure that COVID-19 cases will be appropriately isolated, evaluated, tested (if indicated), and given care.
If the ideal choice does not exist in a facility, use the next best alternative.
NOTE: Some recommendations below apply primarily to facilities with onsite healthcare capacity.
Facilities without onsite healthcare capacity, or without sufficient space to implement effective quarantine, should coordinate with local public health officials to ensure that close contacts of COVID-19 cases will be effectively quarantined and medically monitored.
Close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a common space with a COVID-19 case.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk, as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
NOTE: Some recommendations below apply primarily to facilities with onsite healthcare capacity.
Facilities without onsite healthcare capacity or without sufficient space for medical isolation should coordinate with local public health officials to ensure that suspected COVID-19 cases will be effectively isolated, evaluated, tested (if indicated), and given care.
Infection control guidance below is applicable to all types of correctional facilities.
Individual facilities should assess their unique needs based on the types of exposure staff and incarcerated/detained persons may have with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 cases.
The guidance above recommends verbal screening and temperature checks for incarcerated/detained persons, staff, volunteers, and visitors who enter correctional and detention facilities, as well as incarcerated/detained persons who are transferred to another facility or released from custody.
Below, verbal screening questions for COVID-19 symptoms and contact with known cases, and a safe temperature check procedure are detailed.
The information provided in these FAQs do not cover all questions or issues faced by custodial settings (prisons, jails, and detention facilities).
As with the full CDC guidance document, this information may need to be adapted based on individual facilities physical space, staffing, population, operations, and other resources and conditions.
Facilities should contact CDC or their state, local, territorial, and/or tribal public health departmentexternal icon if they need assistance in applying actions or concerns not specifically covered in the CDC guidance.
Because of close contact and the number of people in correctional and detention facilities (including prisons and jails), staff and people who are incarcerated are at greater risk for the spread of germs.
To help your facility prepare for the possible spread of COVID-19, update your emergency operations plan.
This includes:
Follow CDC guidance on recommended PPE for staff who will have direct contact with an individual with possible COVID-19 infection, or infectious materials.
Make contingency plans for the likely event of PPE shortages.
Follow the CDC Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) and monitor the guidance website regularly for updates for staff evaluating and providing care for confirmed or suspected COVID-19 cases.
When no on-site healthcare capacity is available, make a plan for how to ensure that people suspected to have COVID-19 will be medically isolated, evaluated, tested (if indicated), and provided medical care.
Contact and collaborate with your state, local, tribal and territorial health departments for more specific guidance.
The best way to protect your staff is to prevent exposure.
Start by:
Review the Occupational Safety and Health Administration websiteexternal iconexternal icon and guidance for businesses and employers to identify any additional strategies the facility can use within its role as an employer.
Staff evaluating and providing care for people with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 should follow the CDC Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) and monitor the guidance website regularly for updates to these recommendations.
Facilities without on-site health care capacity should make a plan for how they will ensure that suspected COVID-19 cases will be medically isolated, evaluated, tested (if indicated), and provided medical care.
Contact and collaborate with your state, local, tribal, and territorial health departments for more specific guidance.
The best way to prevent illness among people who are incarcerated is to prevent exposure to the virus that causes COVID-19.
Start by:
You can get up-to-date information about local COVID-19 activity by keeping in touch with your local and state public health officialsexternal iconexternal icon, and keeping up-to-date with the CDC website.
If COVID-19 is known to be spreading in the local community close to your facility, but there are no confirmed cases among people who are incarcerated, staff, or visitors who have been inside the facility within the past 14 days:
New entrants should undergo temperature screening in addition to the following verbal screening questions:
Staff performing temperature checks should follow these steps:
If there is spread of COVID-19 in the community close to your facility, consider suspending contact visits.
If contact visits continue, all potential visitors should be asked:
Staff should also perform temperature checks for all visitors and volunteers.
Any visitor who answers yes to one of these questions or who declines screening should not be allowed into the facility.
When possible, facilities should let potential visitors know about these rules before they travel to the facility.
Facilities can place posters in visiting areas and ask people who are incarcerated to inform their family members and visitors about these rules.
To limit the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19, routinely clean and disinfect surfaces and objects that are touched often.
Read CDC guidance on cleaning and disinfecting to learn more.
This may include cleaning objects and surfaces not ordinarily cleaned daily, such as doorknobs, light switches, and countertops.
Clean with the cleaners typically used.
Use all cleaning products according to the directions on the label.
For disinfection, most common EPA-registered household disinfectants should be effective.
A list of products that are EPA-approved for use against the virus that causes COVID-19 is available herepdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon.
If you think someone who is incarcerated in the facility is sick with COVID-19 (see COVID-19 symptoms), activate your emergency plan and notify local public health officials.
Ensure that the sick person is wearing a clean, disposable facemaskpdf icon, and separate the sick person from others, ideally within an individual housing space and bathroom.
Provide them with tissues for when they cough or sneeze, and a lined trash receptacle when possible.
Staff evaluating and providing care for confirmed or suspected COVID-19 cases should follow the CDC Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) and monitor the guidance website regularly for updates to these recommendations.
Facilities without on-site healthcare staff should contact their state, local, tribal, and/or territorial health department to coordinate effective isolation and necessary medical care.
Ensure only trained personnel wearing recommended personal protective equipment (PPE) have contact with or transport individuals who have or may have COVID-19.
People who are incarcerated and have COVID-19 should be placed under medical isolation in a separate room, ideally with solid walls and a solid door that closes fully.
If not available, refer to the full guidance document for other options for medical isolation.
If multiple people become ill with COVID-19:
Provide clear information to staff and people who are incarcerated about the presence of COVID-19 cases within the facility.
Close contacts of the sick person (who have been within 6 feet of the sick person or had direct contact with infectious droplets, such as from a cough or squeeze) should be placed under quarantine for at least 14 days.
Follow CDC guidance on quarantining close contacts of people with COVID-19.
If separate spaces for individual quarantined people are not available, refer to the full guidance document for other options.
Monitor symptoms twice per day and move anyone developing symptoms to medical isolation right away (after ensuring they are wearing a face mask).
Quarantined people at high risk for complications of COVID-19 (older adults, people with severe underlying chronic medical conditions) should not be housed with other quarantined people if at all possible.
If you think someone on your staff is sick with COVID-19 (see COVID-19 symptoms), activate your emergency plan and notify public health officials.
Give them a clean, disposable facemaskpdf iconpdf icon and send them home right away.
Close contacts of the sick person (who have been within 6 feet of the sick person or have had direct contact with infectious droplets, such as from a cough or squeeze) should self-quarantine at for 14 days home and follow CDC recommended steps for people who are sick with COVID-19 symptoms.
Follow guidance for cleaning and disinfecting rooms and areas where a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 have visited, including transport vehicles.
Ensure staff or people who are incarcerated wear appropriate PPE when cleaning the facility and handling food service items of people with possible or confirmed COVID-19.
Laundry of a person with COVID-19 may be washed with the laundry of other individuals.
Individuals handling laundry should wear recommended PPE, should not shake the laundry, and should clean their hands often to prevent spread of COVID .
If there is a case of COVID-19 in your facility, suspend contact visitation programs.
Instead, use virtual visitation when possible.
Facilities should ensure that incarcerated individuals receive medical evaluation and treatment at the first sign of COVID-19 symptoms.
Staff evaluating and providing care for confirmed or suspected COVID-19 cases should follow the CDC Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) and monitor the guidance website regularly for updates to these recommendations.
Facilities without on-site healthcare staff should contact their state, local, tribal, and/or territorial health department to coordinate effective medical isolation and necessary medical care.
Facilities should have a plan in place to safely transfer persons with complications from COVID-19 to a local hospital if they require care beyond what the facility is able to provide.
When evaluating and treating persons with symptoms of COVID-19 who do not speak English, provide a translator when possible.
Spanish and Simplified Chinese materials are available for those who need them.
Close contacts of a sick person (who have been within about 6 feet of the sick person or have had direct contact with infectious droplets, such as from a cough or squeeze) should be placed under quarantine for 14 days to determine if they develop symptoms.
CDC has developed guidance on quarantining close contacts of people with COVID-19.
Be sure to monitor symptoms twice a day and move anyone developing symptoms to medical isolation right away, after ensuring that they are wearing a face mask.
Individuals under quarantine should stay within the quarantine space, including when eating their meals, using the bathroom, and receiving medical evaluation.
Laundry of people in quarantine can be washed with the laundry of others.
Individuals handling laundry should wear recommended PPE, should not shake the laundry, and should clean their hands often.
Ideally, people under quarantine due to contact with a COVID-19 case should be housed individually.
If separate spaces in a facility are not available, refer to CDCs full guidance document for correctional and detention centers for other options.
People at high risk for complications of COVID-19 (older adults, people with severe underlying chronic medical conditions) should not be housed with other quarantined people if at all possible.
Facilities without enough space or without onsite healthcare capacity should coordinate with local public health officials.
Individuals in quarantine can be released from quarantine back to their previous housing arrangement in the facility if they have not developed symptoms during the 14-day time period.
The best way to prevent illness is to take steps to avoid being exposed to this virus.
Start by ensuring you and others around you use everyday preventive actions (such as washing hands often, avoiding touching your eyes, nose, and mouth, and covering your cough).
Read How to Protect Yourself to learn more.
If there is spread of COVID-19 in the community close to the facility, you will be asked daily about symptoms over the last 24 hours and any contact you had with someone infected with COVID-19 in the last 14 days.
Your temperature will also be checked daily.
Staff and people incarcerated in correctional and detention facilities are at greater risk for some illnesses, such as COVID-19, because of the close living arrangements inside the facility.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person, through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
This is why washing your hands regularly and avoid close contact with other people when possible prevents illness.
If you think you have been exposed to COVID-19 and develop a fever or symptoms of respiratory illness, such as cough or difficulty breathing, stay home.
If you are at work, alert your supervisor right away and go home.
Read What To Do if You Are Sick to learn more.
Anyone who has close contact with a person with COVID-19 will need to stay away from other people for at least 14 days to see whether symptoms develop.
If you are a close contact of a person with COVID-19, you should self-quarantine at home by staying in a separate room away from others.
Read Caring for Yourself at Home and What To Do if You Are Sick to learn more.
The best way to prevent illness is to take steps to avoid being exposed to this virus.
Start by ensuring you and others around you use everyday preventive actions (such as washing hands often, avoiding touching your eyes, nose, and mouth, and covering your cough).
Read How to Protect Yourself to learn more.
People in correctional and detention facilities are at greater risk for some illnesses, such as COVID-19, because of close living arrangements with other people.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person, through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or be launched into the air and inhaled into someones lungs.
It is possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or eyes; however, this is not the most likely way the virus spreads.
If you think you have been exposed to COVID-19 and develop a fever or symptoms of respiratory illness, such as cough or difficulty breathing, alert facility staff right away to make sure you receive medical care and protect the people around you from being exposed to the virus.
Anyone who has close contact with a person with COVID-19 will need to stay away from other people for at least 14 days to make sure they arent sick as well.
This means that they will be placed in a room separate from others, or just with other people who have also been exposed to the same sick person.
During this time, they will be checked for COVID-19 symptoms.
If testing is available, a person in quarantine may be tested several times until medical staff are sure they do not have the virus.
Anyone who has had flu-like symptoms in the last 24 hours or has been in contact with someone who has or is suspected to have COVID-19 in last 14 days should not visit a correctional or detention facility.
All visitors will be screened for symptoms and contact with someone with COVID-19.
Staff will also perform temperature checks on all visitors.
Visitors should contact the facility about their rules on visits before they travel.
If a person in the facility has COVID-19, visitors may not be allowed to enter the facility.
Instead, non-contact visits can be used, when possible.
People in correctional and detention facilities are at greater risk for illnesses, such as COVID-19 because of their close living arrangements with other people.
The virus is thought to spread mainly from person-to-person, through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or be launched into the air and inhaled into someones lungs.
It is possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or eyes; however, this is not the most likely way the virus spreads.
Anyone who has close contact with a person with COVID-19 will need to put into quarantine for at least 14 days.
This means that they will be placed in a room separate from others, until staff are sure that they dont have symptoms.
During this time, they will be checked for COVID-19 symptoms twice a day.
If testing is available, a person in quarantine may be tested several times until medical staff are sure they do not have the virus.
Anyone who has had flu-like symptoms in the last 24 hours or has been in contact with someone who has or is suspected to have COVID-19 in last 14 days should not visit a correctional or detention facility.
Staff may screen and perform temperature checks on all visitors.
Visitors should contact the facility about their rules on visits before they travel to a facility.
If there is a person in the facility who has COVID-19, visitors may not be allowed to enter the facility.
Some facilities may arrange for non-contact visits when possible.
At the request of tribal leaders, federal partners developed this Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) fact sheet to help guide tribes with funeral and burial health and safety.
This fact sheet also helps tribes plan for an increase in deaths within a community.
Tribes and families practice unique traditions and refer to death in varying ways as they honor those who have passed on.
We share this public health guidance with sincere respect for those traditions.
Please visit cdc.gov for the most updated guidance on COVID-19.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a new disease, and we are still learning about how it spreads and the severity of illness it causes.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is believed to spread person-to-person between people who are in close contact (being within about 6 feet) with one another.
Some people without symptoms may be able to spread the virus.
The virus likely spreads primarily through saliva or mucus droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks.
This is somewhat like how the flu (influenza) and other infections such as the common cold spread.
These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be breathed in.
Droplets can remain on surfaces such as countertops and doorknobs for hours to days.
COVID-19 can cause mild to severe illness.
This can result in someone being admitted to the hospital and even an intensive care unit.
It can even cause death.
People who are infected often have symptoms of illness.
People 65 and older and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
This includes people with serious heart conditions, severe obesity, diabetes, chronic kidney disease (or undergoing dialysis), liver disease, chronic lung disease or moderate to severe asthma, or people who have a weakened immune system (immunocompromised).
Everyone can take actions, such as social distancing, to help slow the spread.
Tribes have asked for guidance to help them plan for increased death from COVID-19.
While an increase in deaths may be a very difficult topic to discuss and plan for, tribal leaders have resources to help:
Tribal leaders can also do the following:
There is currently no known risk associated with being in the same room at a funeral or visitation service with the body of someone who died of COVID-19.
Anyone who is sick should stay home.
These actions help prevent people from getting sick and help stop the spread of the virus.
Also, tribal leaders can help.
While each tribe has its own traditions regarding death rituals and funerals (including family feeds, giveaways, and commemorative gatherings), it is important for leaders to determine ways for immediate family members to take part while making sure that
CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where social distancing is difficult to maintain (for example, at grocery stores and pharmacies).
This is especially important in communities where COVID-19 is spreading.
So, if you do go to a funeral or gathering, use a cloth face covering.
But also try to keep about 6 feet from others who are present.
You can find more information about using a cloth face covering.
Do not place cloth face coverings on young children under age 2.
Also, dont place a face covering on anyone who has trouble breathing or who is unconscious or unable to remove the mask without assistance.
More information on large gatherings and events.
You should avoid touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19, before the body is prepared for viewing.
Though we are still learning more about how COVID-19 spreads, it may be possible that you could get COVID-19 by touching the body of someone who has died of COVID-19.
After the body has been prepared for viewing there may be less of a chance of the virus spreading from certain types of touching, such as holding the hand or hugging.
But you should avoid other activities, such as kissing, washing, and shrouding before and during body preparation.
After any contact with the body, be sure to wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
If soap and water are not readily available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
If washing the body, shrouding, or other important religious or cultural practices are observed in a specific tribal community, families are encouraged to consider this guidance and work with their cultural and religious leaders and funeral home staff on how to reduce their exposure as much as possible.
If you participate in these activities, wear disposable gloves (nitrile, latex, or rubber).
And you may need additional equipment (called personal protective equipment, or PPE).
For example, you may need the following:
Following preparation of the body remove PPE and throw away.
Immediately wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
Shower after completing body preparation activities.
If you did not wear any personal protective equipment while preparing the body, wash your clothes in the warmest setting possible and dry them completely.
For more information see CDC resources on Cleaning and Disinfecting Your Facility or Cleaning and Disinfecting Your Home.
Follow these steps if you are involved in transporting the body of someone who died from COVID-19:
People who died from COVID-19 can be buried or cremated.
But check for any additional tribal, state, local, or territorial requirements that may dictate the handling and disposition of the body of individuals who have passed from certain infectious diseases.
After the body has been prepared for viewing and burial, clean surfaces using EPA-approved products in accordance with manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (such as concentration, application method, and contact time).
Information on cleaning and sanitizing can be found on the CDC website:
Spouses and families of American Indian/Alaska Native Veterans may be eligible for burial assistance.
Burial benefits can include opening and closing of the grave, perpetual care, a government headstone or marker, a burial flag, and a Presidential Certificate—at no cost to the family.
Some veterans may also be eligible to receive money to help cover the cost (burial allowances).
The National Cemetery Administration oversees burial benefits.
This office is under the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), Veterans Benefits Administration.
The VA can be contacted at the following phone numbers:
The CDC has many resources available for you and your community:
For further information, or to provide comment on this resource, please contact the CDC Emergency Operations Center at preparedness@cdc.gov.
CDC/ATSDR is committed to promoting the health and safety of American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) communities.
Everyone has a role to play to reduce and slow the transmission of COVID-19.
Social distancing is an essential step in preventing the spread of COVID-19.
Social distancing is reducing physical interaction between people and it lowers the chances of spreading illness between people.
Practice social distancing by putting space (at least 6 feet) between yourself and others.
It is especially important during the COVID-19 pandemic to protect people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
These people include older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions.
People can follow social distancing by reducing how often they are physically near others, reducing the overall number of people they are physically near, and by keeping at least 6 feet away from others when they do leave their homes.
Staying physically apart is important, even in places like the workplace, school, when shopping, or in other places in your community.
The goal of social distancing is to reduce the risk of spreading COVID-19.
Social distancing may make some people feel socially or culturally isolated, and possibly lead to loneliness, depression and poor health.
It is important to use other non-physical ways to connect with family and friends, like sending a letter, phone calls, video calls, or social media.
Exercising in or around your home or yard and sitting or working outside, close to home, can also help.
Social distancing to stay healthy and safe may prevent people from following some traditional and ceremonial practices.
This may be especially relevant for American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) communities, but it is very important to use social distancing to reduce the spread of COVID-19.
Below are some ways to cope with social distancing and the stress COVID-19 may cause:
People who need help or know someone that needs help with stress or anxiety can contact the Disaster Distress Helpline external iconat 1-800-985-5990, or talk to a counselor or social worker that may be available in your area.
AI/AN communities with multi-generational households or those in rural or tribal areas may experience unique challenges with social distancing, access to grocery stores, water, and local and tribal health services.
However, there are several steps individuals can take to keep your home and family safe.
See guidance on COVID-19 for healthcare professionals.
For questions, issues, or requests, tribal leaders can contact CDC.
Other guidance dedicated to tribal members can be found through the following links:
Interim Infection Prevention and Control Guidance for Veterinary Clinics During the COVID-19 Response | CDC
Who this guidance is for: Veterinarians and veterinary staff providing care to companion animals
Purpose:  The intent of this guidance is to facilitate preparedness and to ensure practices are in place in a veterinary clinical setting to help people and animals stay safe and healthy.
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the transmission and severity of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
This is a rapidly evolving situation.
CDC will update this guidance as needed, and as additional information becomes available.
States may have their own specific requirements for these circumstances.
Please check the CDC COVID-19 website periodically for updated information as well as interim guidance.
Note: The scientific name of this novel coronavirus is severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
In people, the disease caused by the virus is called Coronavirus Disease 2019, or COVID-19.
In the context of animal health, we refer to the disease as SARS-CoV-2.
SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19 in humans, is thought to be spread primarily through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking.
Airborne transmission over long distances is unlikely.
The virus has been shown to survive in aerosols for hours, on cardboard for up to one day, and on plastic or steel for up to three days.
There are also reports that people may be able to spread the virus while pre-symptomatic or asymptomatic.
We are still learning about this novel zoonotic virus, and it appears that in some rare situations, human to animal transmission can occur.
CDC is aware of a small number animals, including dogs and cats, reportedexternal icon to be infected with SARS-CoV-2 after close contact with people with COVID-19.
The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) recently reportedexternal icon a confirmed infection of SARS-CoV-2 in a tiger with a respiratory illness in New York, which is the first confirmed case of SARS-CoV-2 infection in an animal in the United States, as well as the first confirmed infection in a tiger in the world.
Several other big cats (tigers and lions) in a neighboring enclosure at the zoo also developed a mild respiratory illness, but all are expected to recover.
Officials believe this tiger was likely infected by a zoo employee, suggesting person to tiger spread.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by SARS-CoV-2.
Limited information is available to characterize the spectrum of clinical illness associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection in animals.
Clinical signs thought to be compatible with SARS-CoV-2 infection in animals include fever, coughing, difficulty breathing or shortness of breath, lethargy, sneezing, nasal discharge, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Follow CDCs guidance on what to do if you are sick.
Ask staff to stay home if they are sick.
Employees who appear to have symptoms (i.e fever, cough, or shortness of breath) upon arrival at work or who become sick during the day should immediately be separated from other employees, customers, and visitors and sent home.
Inform the staffs team members if they have been exposed to a potential COVID-19 case, while maintaining confidentiality as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Notify the local health department of the potential exposure as well.
Ill staff should not return to work until their fever (defined as ≥ 100.4°F) is absent for at least 72 hours without the use of fever reducing medication, other symptoms have improved, and at least 7 days have passed since symptom onset.
Implement sick leave policies for veterinary clinic staff that are flexible, nonpunitive, and consistent with public health guidance, allowing employees to stay home if they have symptoms of respiratory infection.
Follow CDC guidelines for cleaning and disinfecting areas the sick employee visited.
If possible, staff should each have their own workspace/equipment and avoid sharing desks/work tools.
If these items must be shared, they should be frequently disinfected.
Critical workers, like veterinarians and their staff, can be permitted to continue to work following a potential exposure to COVID-19, provided they remain asymptomatic and additional precautions are implemented to protect them and the workplace.
Consider having everyone who enters the clinic, including employees and visitors, wear a cloth face covering over their nose and mouth to contain respiratory secretions, unless engaged in an activity that requires some form of PPE.
To protect staff and preserve personal protective equipment (PPE) and supplies during the COVID-19 pandemic, veterinary clinics should postpone elective procedures, surgeries, and non-urgent visits, and prioritize urgent and emergency visits and procedures until regular business operations resume in your community.
The greatest risk of COVID-19 exposure to staff at veterinary clinics comes from person-to-person transmission through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, or talking, which is the main way SARS-CoV-2 spreads.
Clinic staff should be screened daily, at the beginning of shifts prior to interacting with staff and clients and should practice social distancing.
Clinics should take precautions to minimize staff contact with all pet owners.
Examples of actions to take to minimize contact with pet owners or other people include:
Have a plan in place to handle animals with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 exposure, or potentially compatible clinical signs.
Veterinarians should contact their state public health veterinarianpdf iconexternal icon or state animal health officialexternal icon for guidance on testing animals for SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Before scheduled appointments or upon arrival, a staff person should ask if the pet has had any exposure to a person with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
If a pet owner currently has respiratory symptoms or is a suspected or confirmed case of COVID-19, they should not visit the veterinary facility.
Consider whether a telemedicine consult is appropriate.
If possible, a healthy friend or family member from outside their household should bring the animal to the veterinary clinic.
The clinic should use all appropriate precautions to minimize contact with the person bringing the animal to the clinic.
If there is an emergency with the animal, the animal should not be denied care.
The clinical spectrum of illness for the SARS-CoV-2 virus remains largely undefined in animals.
Animals may present with respiratory or gastrointestinal clinical signs based on the presentation of other coronaviruses more commonly found in animals as well as other emerging coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-1 infection.
Clinical signs expected to be compatible with possible SARS-CoV-2 infection in mammalian animals may include:
Given current limitations in knowledge regarding COVID-19 and companion animals, these PPE guidelines use a cautious approach.
Recommendations may change over time, as new information becomes available.
1PPE Standard Precautions should be applied in any setting where veterinary care is delivered and may include use of gloves or protective eyewear depending on the type of procedure and if exposure to fluids, exudates, feces, saliva, or other animal fluids is possible.
2A SARS-CoV-2 or COVID-19 exposure in this context refers to the following conditions within the 14 days prior to presenting for veterinary care:
3Reusable (i.e.
washable) gowns are typically made of polyester or polyester-cotton fabrics.
Gowns of these fabrics can be safely laundered according to routine procedures and reused.
4Respiratory protection that is at least as protective as a fit tested NIOSH-certified disposable N95 filtering facepiece respirator is recommended.
5 Clinical signs expected to be compatible with possible with SARS-CoV-2 infection in mammalian animals may include:
6Aerosol generating procedures, such as suction or bronchoscopy, should be avoided if possible on any animals that have been exposed to or are suspected of being infected with SARS-CoV-2.
7An N95 mask may be preferred depending on practitioners judgement.
More than one donning method may be acceptable.
Training and practice using your clinics procedure is critical.
More information on how to Put On (Don) PPE and how to Take Off (Doff) PPE can be found here.
Facilities implementing reuse or extended use of PPE will need to adjust their donning and doffing procedures to accommodate those practices.
Remove visible contamination if present (do not shake) and launder with a detergent (or bleach, if appropriate for the item) in accordance with the manufacturers instructions using the warmest appropriate water setting.
Laundry and Bedding
Routine testing of animals for SARS-CoV-2 is currently not recommended.
Animal testing for SARS-CoV-2 is available for mammalian species for certain situations; testing is not currently available for amphibians, reptiles, fish, or birds.
Veterinarians are strongly encouraged to rule out other, more common causes of illness before considering SARS-CoV-2 testing, especially among animals without a COVID-19 exposure.
Additional guidance on determining when testing an animal for SARS-CoV-2 is recommended can be found here.
Take a thorough history to assess for likely exposure or risk factors in the 2 weeks prior to symptom onset, such as whether the animal has been in contact with a person diagnosed with COVID-19, a person with COVID-19 compatible symptoms, or had recent exposure to a known high-risk environment, such as a nursing home.
Veterinarians who have evaluated an animal and determined that it is consistent with SARS-CoV-2 testing guidance should contact their state public health veterinarianpdf iconexternal icon (SPHV) or state animal health officialexternal icon to discuss testing options.
If an animal test is presumptive positive, veterinarians should immediately contact their state public health veterinarian or state veterinarian regarding next steps, and the testing laboratory should contact USDAs National Veterinary Services Laboratories for guidance on forwarding samples for confirmatory testing.
Confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infections in animals must be reported by USDA to the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE).external icon
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Based on the limited data available, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
We are still learning about this virus, and it appears that in some rare situations, people can spread the virus to animals.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by the virus and the role animals may play in the spread of COVID-19.
Veterinarians should assess whether pets infected with SARS-CoV-2 can be cared for at home.
Considerations for home isolation include whether:
If the pet can be isolated at home, advise the pet owner to do the following:
Veterinary clinics or hospitals caring for ill, test-positive household animals should have:
Where deemed appropriate, repeat testing of pets for SARS-CoV-2 or additional testing (e.g serology) should be conducted in coordination with a state public health veterinarian and/or state animal health official.
Informing pet owners on what is known about companion animals and SARS-CoV-2 is important to help them stay safe and healthy around their pets.
Below are key messages to share with pet owners:
CDC guidance for COVID-19 may be adapted by state and local health departments to respond to rapidly changing local circumstances.
Revisions were made on March 24, 2020 to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on March 9, 2020, to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on March 4, 2020, to reflect the following:
Limited information is available to characterize the spectrum of clinical illness associated with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
No vaccine or specific treatment for COVID-19 is available; care is supportive.
The CDC clinical criteria for considering testing for COVID-19 have been developed based on what is known about COVID-19 and are subject to change as additional information becomes available.
Update and Interim Guidance on Outbreak of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
CDC continues to closely monitor an outbreak of respiratory illness caused by COVID-19 that was initially detected in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China.
This HAN Update provides a situational update and guidance to state and local health departments and health care providers.
Healthcare providers should immediately notify their localexternal icon or stateexternal icon health department in the event of the identification of a PUI for COVID-19.
When working with your local or state health department check their available hours.
Clinicians considering testing of persons with possible COVID-19 should continue to work with their local and state health departments to coordinate testing through public health laboratories, or use COVID-19 diagnostic testing, authorized by the Food and Drug Administration under an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) through clinical laboratories.
Increasing testing capacity will allow clinicians to consider COVID-19 testing for a wider group of symptomatic patients.
Clinicians should use their judgment to determine if a patient has signs and symptoms compatible with COVID-19 and whether the patient should be tested.
Most patients with confirmed COVID-19 have developed fever1 and/or symptoms of acute respiratory illness (e.g cough, difficulty breathing).
Priorities for testing include:
Other considerations that may guide testing are epidemiologic factors such as the occurrence of local community transmission of COVID-19 infections in a jurisdiction.
Clinicians are strongly encouraged to test for other causes of respiratory illness.
Ensure optimal care options for all hospitalized patients, lessen the risk of nosocomial infections, and maintain the integrity of the healthcare system
Ensure that those who are at highest risk of complication of infection are rapidly identified and appropriately triaged
As resources allow, test individuals in the surrounding community of rapidly increasing hospital cases to decrease community spread, and ensure health of essential workers
Clinicians should immediately implement recommended infection prevention and control practices if a patient is suspected of having COVID-19.
They should also notify infection control personnel at their healthcare facility and their state or local health department if a patient is classified as a PUI for COVID-19.
State health departments that have identified a PUI or a laboratory-confirmed case should complete a PUI and Case Report form through the processes identified on CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 website.
State and local health departments can contact CDCs Emergency Operations Center (EOC) at 770-488-7100 for assistance with obtaining, storing, and shipping appropriate specimens to CDC for testing, including after hours or on weekends or holidays.
For initial diagnostic testing for COVID-19, CDC recommends collecting and testing upper respiratory tract specimens (nasopharyngeal swab).
CDC also recommends testing lower respiratory tract specimens, if available.
For patients who develop a productive cough, sputum should be collected and tested for COVID-19.
The induction of sputum is not recommended.
For patients for whom it is clinically indicated (e.g those receiving invasive mechanical ventilation), a lower respiratory tract aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage sample should be collected and tested as a lower respiratory tract specimen.
Specimens should be collected as soon as possible once a PUI is identified, regardless of the time of symptom onset.
See Interim Guidelines for Collecting, Handling, and Testing Clinical Specimens from Patients Under Investigation (PUIs) for COVID-19 and Biosafety FAQs for handling and processing specimens from suspected cases and PUIs.
1Fever may be subjective or confirmed
2For healthcare personnel, testing may be considered if there has been exposure to a person with suspected COVID-19 without laboratory confirmation.
Because of their often extensive and close contact with vulnerable patients in healthcare settings, even mild signs and symptoms (e.g sore throat) of COVID-19 should be evaluated among potentially exposed healthcare personnel.S.
Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure in a Healthcare Setting to Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
3Close contact is defined as—
a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a COVID-19 case for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a healthcare waiting area or room with a COVID-19 case
b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g being coughed on)
If such contact occurs while not wearing recommended personal protective equipment or PPE (e.g gowns, gloves, NIOSH-certified disposable N95 respirator, eye protection), criteria for PUI consideration are met.
Data to inform the definition of close contact are limited.
Considerations when assessing close contact include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk) and the clinical symptoms of the person with COVID-19 (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk as does exposure to a severely ill patient).
Special consideration should be given to healthcare personnel exposed in healthcare settings as described in CDCs Interim U.S.
Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure in a Healthcare Setting to Patients with COVID-19.
4Documentation of laboratory-confirmation of COVID-19 may not be possible for travelers or persons caring for COVID-19 patients in other countries.
5Affected areas are defined as geographic regions where sustained community transmission has been identified.
For a list of relevant affected areas, see CDCs Coronavirus Disease 2019 Information for Travel.
Revisions were made on April 3, 2020, to reflect the following:
This interim guidance is for clinicians caring for patients with confirmed infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
CDC will update this interim guidance as more information becomes available.
The National Institutes of Health recently published guidelines on prophylaxis use, testing, and management of COVID-19 patients.
For more information, please visit: National Institutes of Health: Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Treatment Guidelinesexternal icon.
The recommendations in the guidelines were based on scientific evidence and expert opinion and will be updated as more data becomes available.
The incubation period for COVID-19 is thought to extend to 14 days, with a median time of 4-5 days from exposure to symptoms onset.1-3 One study reported that 97.5% of persons with COVID-19 who develop symptoms will do so within 11.5 days of SARS-CoV-2 infection.3
The signs and symptoms of COVID-19 present at illness onset vary, but over the course of the disease, most persons with COVID-19 will experience the following1,4-9:
Atypical presentations have been described, and older adults and persons with medical comorbidities may have delayed presentation of fever and respiratory symptoms.10,11 In one study of 1,099 hospitalized patients, fever was present in only 44% at hospital admission but later developed in 89% during hospitalization.1 Headache, confusion, rhinorrhea, sore throat, hemoptysis, vomiting, and diarrhea have been reported but are less common (&lt;10%).1,4-6 Some persons with COVID-19 have experienced gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea and nausea prior to developing fever and lower respiratory tract signs and symptoms.9 Anosmia or ageusia preceeding the onset of respiratory symptoms has been anecdotally reported12, but more information is needed to understand its role in identifying COVID-19.
Several studies have reported that the signs and symptoms of COVID-19 in children are similar to adults and are usually milder compared to adults.13-17 For more information on the clinical presentation and course among children, see Information for Pediatric Healthcare Providers.
Several studies have documented SARS-CoV-2 infection in patients who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic) and in patients not yet symptomatic (pre-symptomatic).14,16,18-28 Since asymptomatic persons are not routinely tested, the prevalence of asymptomatic infection and detection of pre-symptomatic infection is not well understood.
One study found that as many as 13% of RT-PCR-confirmed cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection in children were asymptomatic.14 Another study of skilled nursing facility residents infected with SARS-CoV-2 from a healthcare worker demonstrated that half were asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic at the time of contact tracing evaluation and testing.26 Patients may have abnormalities on chest imaging before the onset of symptoms.20,21 Some data suggest that pre-symptomatic infection tended to be detected in younger individuals and was less likely to be associated with viral pneumonia.20,21
Epidemiologic studies have documented SARS-CoV-2 transmission during the pre-symptomatic incubation period20,29-31, and asymptomatic transmission has been suggested in other reports.22,23,32 Virologic studies have also detected SARS-CoV-2 with RT-PCR low cycle thresholds, indicating larger quantities of viral RNA, and cultured viable virus among persons with asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection.19,24,26,33 The exact degree of SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA shedding that confers risk of transmission is not yet clear.
Risk of transmission is thought to be greatest when patients are symptomatic since viral shedding is greatest at the time of symptom onset and declines over the course of several days to weeks.33-36 However, the proportion of SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the population due to asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic infection compared to symptomatic infection is unclear.37
The largest cohort of &gt;44,000 persons with COVID-19 from China showed that illness severity can range from mild to critical38:
In this study, all deaths occurred among patients with critical illness and the overall case fatality rate was 2.3%.38 The case fatality rate among patients with critical disease was 49%.38 Among children in China, illness severity was lower with 94% having asymptomatic, mild or moderate disease, 5% having severe disease, and &lt;1% having critical disease.14 Among U.S. COVID-19 cases with known disposition, the proportion of persons who were hospitalized was 19%.39 The proportion of persons with COVID-19 admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) was 6%.39
Among patients who developed severe disease, the medium time to dyspnea ranged from 5 to 8 days, the median time to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) ranged from 8 to 12 days, and the median time to ICU admission ranged from 10 to 12 days.5,6,10,11 Clinicians should be aware of the potential for some patients to rapidly deteriorate one week after illness onset.
Among all hospitalized patients, a range of 26% to 32% of patients were admitted to the ICU.6,8,11 Among all patients, a range of 3% to 17% developed ARDS compared to a range of 20% to 42% for hospitalized patients and 67% to 85% for patients admitted to the ICU.1,4-6,8,11 Mortality among patients admitted to the ICU ranges from 39% to 72% depending on the study.5,8,10,11 The median length of hospitalization among survivors was 10 to 13 days.1,6,8
Age is a strong risk factor for severe illness, complications, and death.1,6,8,10,11,38-41 Among more than 44,000 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in China, the case fatality rate was highest among older persons: ≥80 years: 14.8%, 70–79 years: 8.0%, 60–69 years: 3.6%, 50–59 years: 1.3%, 40–49 years: 0.4%, &lt;40 years: 0.2%.38,42 Early U.S. epidemiologic data suggests that the case fatality was highest in persons aged ≥85 years (range 10%–27%), followed by 3%–11% for ages 65–84 years, 1%–3% for ages 55–64 years, and &lt;1% for ages 0–54 years.39
Patients in China with no reported underlying medical conditions had an overall case fatality of 0.9%, but case fatality was higher for patients with comorbidities: 10.5% for those with cardiovascular disease, 7.3% for diabetes, and approximately 6% each for chronic respiratory disease, hypertension, and cancer.42 Heart disease, hypertension, prior stroke, diabetes, chronic lung disease, and chronic kidney disease have all been associated with increased illness severity and adverse outcomes.1,6,10,11,38,42,43 Accounting for differences in age and prevalence of underlying condition, mortality associated with COVID-19 in the United States was similar to China.39,40,44
It has been hypothesized that angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) may increase the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19 severity.45 ACE inhibitors and ARBs increase the expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2).
SARS-CoV-2 uses the ACE2 receptor to enter into the host cell.
There are no data to suggest a link between ACE inhibitors or ARBs with worse COVID-19 outcomes.
The American Heart Association (AHA), the Heart Failure Society of America (HFSA), and the American College of Cardiology (ACC) released a statement recommending continuation of these drugs for patients already receiving them for heart failure, hypertension, or ischemic heart disease.46
It has also been hypothesized that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may worsen COVID-19.
Currently, there are no data suggesting an association between COVID-19 clinical outcomes and NSAID use.
More information can be found at Healthcare Professionals: Frequently Asked Questions and Answers.
There are no data concerning the possibility of re-infection with SARS-CoV-2 after recovery from COVID-19.
Viral RNA shedding declines with resolution of symptoms, and may continue for days to weeks.11,33,34 However, the detection of RNA during convalescence does not necessarily indicate the presence of viable infectious virus.
Clinical recovery has been correlated with the detection of IgM and IgG antibodies which signal the development of immunity.36,47-49
Diagnosis of COVID-19 requires detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
Detection of SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA is better in nasopharynx samples compared to throat samples.33,50 Lower respiratory samples may have better yield than upper respiratory samples.33,50.
SARS-CoV-2 RNA has also been detected in stool and blood.13,34,47,51 Detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in blood may be a marker of severe illness.52 Viral RNA shedding may persist over longer periods among older persons and those who had severe illness requiring hospitalization.
(median range of viral shedding among hospitalized patients 12–20 days).11,33-36
Infection with both SARS-CoV-2 and with other respiratory viruses has been reported, and detection of another respiratory pathogen does not rule out COVID-19.53
For more information about testing and specimen collection, handling and storage, visit Evaluating and Testing Persons for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) and Frequently Asked Questions on COVID-19 Testing at Laboratories.
Lymphopenia is the most common lab finding in COVID-19 and is found in as many as 83% of hospitalized patients.1,5 Lymphopenia, neutrophilia, elevated serum alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase levels, elevated lactate dehydrogenase, high CRP, and high ferritin levels may be associated with greater  illness severity.1,5,6,8,11,54 Elevated D-dimer and lymphopenia have been associated with mortality.8,11 Procalcitonin is typically normal on admission, but may increase among those admitted to the ICU.4-6 Patients with critical illness had high plasma levels of inflammatory makers, suggesting potential immune dysregulation.5,55
Chest radiographs of patients with COVID-19 typically demonstrate bilateral air-space consolidation, though patients may have unremarkable chest radiographs early in the disease.1,5,56 Chest CT images from patients with COVID-19 typically demonstrate bilateral, peripheral ground glass opacities.4,8,38,56-65 Because this chest CT imaging pattern is non-specific and overlaps with other infections, the diagnostic value of chest CT imaging for COVID-19 may be low and dependent upon interpretations from individual radiologists.57,66 One study found that 56% of patients who presented within 2 days of diagnosis had a normal CT58.
Conversely, other studies have also identified chest CT abnormalities in patients prior to the detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA.56,67 Given the variability in chest imaging findings, chest radiograph or CT alone is not recommended for the diagnosis of COVID-19.
The American College of Radiology also does not recommend CT for screening or as a first-line test for diagnosis of COVID-19.
(See American College of Radiology Recommendationsexternal icon).
Patients with a mild clinical presentation (absence of viral pneumonia and hypoxia) may not initially require hospitalization, and many patients will be able to manage their illness at home.
The decision to monitor a patient in the inpatient or outpatient setting should be made on a case-by-case basis.
This decision will depend on the clinical presentation, requirement for supportive care, potential risk factors for severe disease, and the ability of the patient to self-isolate at home.
Patients with risk factors for severe illness (see People Who Are at Higher Risk for Severe Illness) should be monitored closely given the possible risk of progression to severe illness in the second week after symptom onset.5,6,10,11
For information regarding infection prevention and control recommendations, please see Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) or Persons Under Investigation for COVID-19 in Healthcare Settings.
Some patients with COVID-19 will have severe disease requiring hospitalization for management.
No specific treatment for COVID-19 is currently FDA approved.
Corticosteroids have been widely used in hospitalized patients with severe illness in China6,8,10,11; however, the benefit of corticosteroid use cannot be determined based upon uncontrolled observational data.
By contrast, patients with MERS-CoV or influenza who were given corticosteroids were more likely to have prolonged viral replication, receive mechanical ventilation, and have higher mortality.68-72 Therefore, corticosteroids should be avoided unless indicated for other reasons, such as management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation or septic shock.
More information can be found at Healthcare Professionals: Frequently Asked Questions and Answers.
Inpatient management revolves around the supportive management of the most common complications of severe COVID-19: pneumonia, hypoxemic respiratory failure/ARDS, sepsis and septic shock, cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia, acute kidney injury, and complications from prolonged hospitalization including secondary bacterial infections, thromboembolism, gastrointestinal bleeding, and critical illness polyneuropathy/myopathy.1,4-6,10,11,38,73-76
The Infectious Diseases Society of America has released guidelines on the treatment and management of patients with COVID-19.
For more information, please visit: Infectious Diseases Society of America Guidelines on the Treatment and Management of Patients with COVID-19 Infection.external icon
The World Health Organization and the Surviving Sepsis Campaign have both released comprehensive guidelines for the inpatient management of patients with COVID-19, including those who are critically ill. For more information visit: Interim Guidance on Clinical management of severe acute respiratory infection when novel coronavirus (nCoV) infection is suspectedexternal icon (WHO) and Surviving Sepsis Campaign: Guidelines on the Management of Critically Ill Adults with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)pdf iconexternal icon.
For more information on the management of children, see Information for Pediatric Healthcare Providers and the Surviving Sepsis Campaign International Guidelines for the Management of Septic Shock and Sepsis-Associated Organ Dysfunction in Childrenexternal icon.
No FDA-approved drugs have demonstrated safety and efficacy in randomized controlled trials for patients with COVID-19.
Use of investigational therapies for treatment of COVID-19 should ideally be done in the context of enrollment in randomized controlled trials.
Several clinical trials are underway testing multiple drugs with in-vitro antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 and/or immunomodulatory effects that may have clinical benefit.
For the latest information, see Information for Clinicians on Therapeutic Options for COVID-19 Patients.
For the information on registered trials in the U.S see ClinicalTrials.govexternal icon.
Patients who have clinically recovered and are able to discharge from the hospital but who have not been cleared from their Transmission-Based Precautions may continue isolation at their place of residence until cleared.
For recommendations on discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions or home isolation for patients who have recovered from COVID-19 illness, please see: Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions and Disposition of Hospitalized Patients with COVID-19, Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19, and Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Immunocompromised Persons with COVID-19.
There are no drugs or other therapeutics approved by the US Food and Drug Administration to prevent or treat COVID-19.
Current clinical management includes infection prevention and control measures and supportive care, including supplemental oxygen and mechanical ventilatory support when indicated.
Interim guidelines for the medical management of COVID-19 will be provided soon by the Department of Health and Human Services COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel.
Remdesivir is an investigational intravenous drug with broad antiviral activity that inhibits viral replication through premature termination of RNA transcription, and has in-vitro activity against SARS-CoV-2 and in-vitro and in-vivo activity against related beta coronaviruses.
Information about clinical trials of remdesivir is available at ClinicalTrials.govexternal icon.
For patients unable to enroll in a clinical trial, Gilead Sciences is coordinating access to remdesivir through an expanded access programexternal icon.
Pregnant women and children less than 18 years of age with confirmed COVID-19 and severe manifestations of disease can still access the drug through the manufacturers compassionate use programexternal icon.
Hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine are oral prescription drugs that have been used for treatment of malaria and certain inflammatory conditions.
Hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine are under investigation in clinical trials for pre-exposure or post-exposure prophylaxis of SARS-CoV-2 infection, and treatment of patients with mild, moderate, and severe COVID-19.
More information on clinical trials can be found at ClinicalTrials.govexternal icon.
FDA issued an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA)external icon to authorize use of chloroquineexternal icon and hydroxychloroquineexternal icon from the Strategic National Stockpile for treatment of hospitalized adults and adolescents (weight ≥50 kg) with COVID-19 for whom a clinical trial is not available or participation is not feasible.
The prescribing health care provider is responsible for submitting patient outcomes reports as described in the Emergency Use Authorization, and all serious adverse events and medication errors should be reported to FDAs medical product safety reporting program MedWatchexternal icon.
MedWatch is FDAs medical product safety reporting program for health professionals, patients and consumers.
Several other drugs (e.g investigational antivirals, immunotherapeutic, host-directed therapies) are under investigation in clinical trials or are being considered for clinical trials of pre-exposure prophylaxis, post-exposure prophylaxis, or treatment of COVID-19 in the United States and worldwide.
Information on registered clinical trials for COVID-19 in the United States is available at ClinicalTrials.govexternal icon.
FDA has issued guidance for administering or studying use of convalescent plasma for treatmentexternal icon of patients with COVID-19.
Patients at higher risk for infection, severe illness, and poorer outcomes from COVID-19 should protect themselves.
Guidance for patients includes:
COVID-19 is a new disease and there is limited information regarding risk factors for severe disease.
Based on currently available information and clinical expertise, older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Based upon available information to date, those at high-risk for severe illness from COVID-19 include:
People of all ages with underlying medical conditions, particularly if not well controlled, including
CDC guidance for COVID-19 may be adapted by state and local health departments to respond to rapidly changing local circumstances.
This document was updated to reflect the updates in the Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings.
The changes include:
Related Pages
CDC provides guidance on what specimens to collect when testing for COVID-19.
The latest guidance is available online at Evaluating and Testing Persons for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Healthcare providers and public health officials managing persons with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) under isolation who are not in healthcare settings.
This includes, but is not limited to, at home, in a hotel or dormitory room, or in group isolation facility.
For Hospitalized Patients, see (Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions Among Hospitalized Patients with COVID-19).
Updates as of April 4, 2020
Limited information is available to characterize the spectrum of clinical illness, transmission efficiency, and the duration of viral shedding for persons with novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
This guidance is based on available information about COVID-19 and subject to change as additional information becomes available.
The decision to discontinue isolation* should be made in the context of local circumstances.
Options now include both 1) a time-since-illness-onset and time-since-recovery (non-test-based) strategy, and 2) test-based strategy.
Time-since-illness-onset and time-since-recovery strategy (non-test-based strategy)**
Persons with COVID-19 who have symptoms and were directed to care for themselves at home may discontinue isolation under the following conditions:
Test-based strategy (simplified from initial protocol) Previous recommendations for a test-based strategy remain applicable; however, a test-based strategy is contingent on the availability of ample testing supplies and laboratory capacity as well as convenient access to testing.
For jurisdictions that choose to use a test-based strategy, the recommended protocol has been simplified so that only one swab is needed at every sampling.
Persons who have COVID-19 who have symptoms and were directed to care for themselves at home may discontinue isolation under the following conditions:
Persons with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 who have not had any symptoms may discontinue isolation when at least 7 days have passed since the date of their first positive COVID-19 diagnostic test and have had no subsequent illness provided they remain asymptomatic.
For 3 days following discontinuation of isolation, these persons should continue to limit contact (stay 6 feet away from others) and limit potential of dispersal of respiratory secretions by wearing a covering for their nose and mouth whenever they are in settings where other persons are present.
In community settings, this covering may be a barrier mask, such as a bandana, scarf, or cloth mask.
The covering does not refer to a medical mask or respirator.
*Note that recommendations for discontinuing isolation in persons known to be infected with COVID-19 could, in some circumstances, appear to conflict with recommendations on when to discontinue quarantine for persons known to have been exposed to COVID-19.
CDC recommends 14 days of quarantine after exposure based on the time it takes to develop illness if infected.
Thus, it is possible that a person known to be infected could leave isolation earlier than a person who is quarantined because of the possibility they are infected.
**This recommendation will prevent most but cannot prevent all instances of secondary spread.
The risk of transmission after recovery, is likely substantially less than that during illness; recovered persons will not be shedding large amounts of virus by this point if they are shedding at all.
Certain employers can choose to apply more stringent criteria for certain returning workers where a higher threshold to prevent transmission is warranted.
These criteria can include requiring a longer time after recovery or requiring they get tested to show they are not shedding virus.
Such persons include healthcare workers in close contact with vulnerable persons at high-risk for illness and death if those persons get COVID-19.
It also includes persons who work in critical infrastructure or with high-value human assets (e.g military) where introduction of COVID-19 could cause major disruptions or reduce national security.
Lastly, persons who have conditions that might weaken their immune system could have prolonged viral shedding after recovery.
Such persons should discuss with their healthcare provider how best to assess if they are safe to return to work; this might include getting tested again to show that they are not shedding virus.
***All test results should be final before isolation is ended.
Testing guidance is based upon limited information and is subject to change as more information becomes available.
NOTE: Specific guidance for return to work for healthcare facilities for healthcare personnel can be found at: Criteria for Return to Work for Healthcare Personnel with Confirmed or Suspected COVID-19 (Interim Guidance)
Printer friendly version pdf iconPDF
This interim guidance is for staff at local and state health departments, infection prevention and control professionals, and healthcare personnel who are coordinating the home care and isolation1 of people with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 infection, including persons under investigation (see Criteria to Guide Evaluation of Persons Under Investigation (PUI) for COVID-19).
This includes patients evaluated in an outpatient setting who do not require hospitalization (i.e patients who are medically stable and can receive care at home) or patients who are discharged home following a hospitalization with confirmed COVID-19 infection.
In general, people should adhere to home isolation until the risk of secondary transmission is thought to be low.
Visit the Preventing the Spread of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in Homes and Residential Communities page for more information.
Preventing 2COVID-19 from Spreading in Homes and Communities: Interim guidance that may help prevent COVID-19 from spreading among people in homes and in communities.
This document does not apply to patients in healthcare settings.
For interim healthcare infection prevention and control recommendations, see Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Known or Persons Under Investigation forCoronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in a Healthcare Setting.
CDC will update this interim guidance as needed and as more information becomes available.
In consultation with state or local health department staff, a healthcare professional should assess whether the residential setting is appropriate for home care.
Considerations for care at home include whether:
1Isolation is defined as the separation or restriction of activities of an ill person with a contagious disease from those who are well.
CDC guidance for COVID-19 may be adapted by state and local health departments to respond to rapidly changing local circumstances.
Who this is for: Healthcare personnel managing patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
What this is for: To help prevent the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 in healthcare facilities.
How to use: Reference to guide healthcare regarding discontinuing transmission-based precautions and discharging hospitalized patients with COVID-19.
Guidance as of March 23, 2020
This guidance is based on available information about COVID-19 and subject to change as additional information becomes available.
For discontinuation of home isolation for COVID-19, see (Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19).
For return-to-work criteria for healthcare personnel with COVID-19, see (Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Patients with COVID-19).
The decision to discontinue Transmission-Based Precautions should be made using a test-based strategy or a non-test-based strategy (i.e time-since-illness-onset and time-since-recovery strategy).
Meeting criteria for discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions is not a prerequisite for discharge.
When a Testing-Based Strategy is Preferred
Hospitalized patients may have longer periods of SARS-CoV-2 RNA detection compared to patients with mild or moderate disease.
Severely immunocompromised patients (e.g medical treatment with immunosuppressive drugs, bone marrow or solid organ transplant recipients, inherited immunodeficiency, poorly controlled HIV) may also have longer periods of SARS-CoV-2 RNA detection and prolonged shedding of infectious recovery.
These groups may be contagious for longer than others.
In addition, placing a patient in a setting where they will have close contact with individuals at risk for severe disease warrants a conservative approach.
Hence, a test-based strategy is preferred for discontinuation of transmission-based precautions for patients who are
If testing is not readily available, facilities should use the non-test-based strategy for discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions or extend the period of isolation beyond the non-test-based-strategy duration, on a case by case basis in consultation with local and state public health authorities.
The decision to discontinue empiric Transmission-Based Precautions by excluding the diagnosis of COVID-19 for a suspected COVID-19 patient can be made based upon having negative results from at least one FDA Emergency Use Authorized COVID-19 molecular assay for detection of SARS-CoV-2.
Ultimately, clinical judgement and suspicion of SARS-CoV-2 infection determines whether to continue or discontinue empiric Transmission-Based Precautions.
Patients can be discharged from the healthcare facility whenever clinically indicated.
If discharged to a long-term care or assisted living facility, AND
Revisions were made on April 14, 2020, to reflect the following:
Who this is for: Pediatric Healthcare Providers
What this is for: To inform pediatric healthcare providers of information available on children with COVID-19.
How to use: Refer to this information when managing pediatric patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19.
The COVID-19 pandemic is changing rapidly and continues to affect communities across the United States differently.
Some of the strategies used to slow the spread of disease in communities include postponing or cancelling non-urgent elective procedures and using telemedicine instead of face-to-face encounters for routine medical visits.
Ensuring the delivery of newborn and well-child care, including childhood immunization, requires different strategies.
Healthcare providers in communities affected by COVID-19 are using strategies to separate well visits from sick visitsexternal icon.
Examples include:
Because of personal, practice, or community circumstances related to COVID-19, some providers may not be able to provide well child visits, including provision of  immunizations, for all patients in their practice.
If a practice can provide only limited well child visits, healthcare providers are encouraged to prioritize newborn care and vaccination of infants and young children (through 24 months of age) when possible.
CDC is monitoring the situation and will continue to provide guidance.
Pediatric cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), have been reported.
However, there are relatively fewer cases of COVID-19 among children compared to cases among adult patients.1-5
Among cases in children reported from China, most had exposure to household members with confirmed COVID-19.6-10
Illness among pediatric cases appear to be mild, with most cases presenting with symptoms of upper respiratory infection such as:
Relatively few children with COVID-19 are hospitalized, and fewer children than adults experience fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
Severe outcomes have been reported in children including SARS-CoV-2 associated deaths.
Hospitalization was most common among pediatric patients aged &lt;1 year and those with underlying conditions.
Although most cases reported among children to date have not been severe, clinicians should maintain a high index of suspicion for SARS-CoV-2 infection in children and monitor for progression of illness, particularly among infants and children with underlying conditions.
While data on the incubation period for COVID-19 in the pediatric population are limited, it is thought to extend to 14 days, similar to adult patients with COVID-19.11 In studies from China, the reported incubation period among pediatric patients ranged from 2 to 10 days.7,12
Pediatric patients with COVID-19 may experience the following signs or symptoms over the course of the disease:3,4,6,13-15
The predominant signs and symptoms of COVID-19 reported to date among all patients are similar to other viral respiratory infections, including fever, cough, and shortness of breath.
Although these signs and symptoms may occur at any time during the overall disease course, children with COVID-19 may not initially present with fever and cough as often as adult patients.4,15,16 In a report of nine hospitalized infants in China with confirmed COVID-19, only half presented with fever.9 Gastrointestinal symptoms, including abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting, were reported in a minority of adult patients.17 In one pediatric case of COVID-19, diarrhea was the only symptom reported.10
There have been multiple reports to date of children with asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection.3,6,14,15 In one study, up to 13% of pediatric cases with SARS-CoV-2 infection were asymptomatic.16 The prevalence of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection and duration of pre-symptomatic infection in children are not well understood, as asymptomatic individuals are not routinely tested.
Signs and symptoms of COVID-19 in children may be similar to those for common viral respiratory infections or other childhood illnesses.
It is important for pediatric providers to have an appropriate suspicion of COVID-19, but also to continue to consider and test for other diagnoses, such as influenza (see CDCs Flu Information for Healthcare Professionals for more information).
The largest study of pediatric patients (&gt;2,000) with COVID-19 from China reported that illness severity ranged from asymptomatic to critical:16
Based on these early studies, children of all ages are at risk for COVID-19; however, complications of COVID-19 appear to be milder among children compared with adults based on limited reports from China16 and the U.S.4,18 In children, SARS-CoV-2 may have more affinity for the upper respiratory tract (including nasopharyngeal carriage) than the lower respiratory tract.16
As of April 2, 2020, infants aged &lt;1 year accounted for 15% of pediatric COVID-19 cases in the U.S.4 However, this age group remains underrepresented among COVID-19 cases in patients of all ages (0.3%) compared to their percentage in the U.S. population (1.2%).
Relative to adult patients with COVID-19, there were fewer children with COVID-19 requiring hospitalization (6–20%) and ICU admission (0.6–2%).4 Although severe complications (e.g acute respiratory distress syndrome, septic shock) have been reported in children of all ages,4,9,12,19 they appear to be infrequent.
Based on limited data on children with either suspected or confirmed infection with SARS-CoV-2, infants (&lt;12 months of age) may be at higher risk of severe or critical disease compared with older children,16 with hospitalization being most common among children aged &lt;1 year and those with underlying conditions, such as chronic lung disease (including asthma), cardiovascular disease, and immunosuppression.4 Other reports describe a mild disease course, including in infants.7,9,16
As of March 8, 2020, just one pediatric death was reported among confirmed COVID-19 cases in China,15 and as of March 15, 2020, none of the 1,625 deaths associated with COVID-19 in Italy were among children aged &lt;18 years.2 In Spain, no pediatric deaths were reported as of March 16, 2020.5 In the U.S as of April 2, 2020, there have been three deaths among children with laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection that have been reported to CDC, but the contribution of SARS-CoV-2 infection to the cause of death in these cases is unclear.4
There are limited data on laboratory findings associated with COVID-19 in pediatric patients.
Unlike adult patients with COVID-19,20,21 there have been no consistent leukocyte abnormalities reported in pediatric patients.22 Additional studies are required to understand the laboratory findings associated with pediatric cases of COVID-19.
Chest x-rays of children with COVID-19 show patchy infiltrates consistent with viral pneumonia, and chest CT scans have shown nodular ground glass opacities;14,23,24 however, these findings are not specific to COVID-19, may overlap with other diagnoses, and some children may have no radiographic abnormalities.
Chest radiograph or CT alone is not recommended for the diagnosis of COVID-19.
The American College of Radiology also does not recommend CT for screening or as a first-line test for diagnosis of COVID-19.
(See American College of Radiology Recommendationsexternal icon)
Currently, there are no specific drugs approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for COVID-19.
Treatment remains largely supportive and includes prevention and management of complications.
Healthcare facilities should ensure that infection prevention and control policies and universal source control are in place to minimize chance of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 among providers, patients, and families.
For infection prevention and control considerations for infants born to mothers with known or suspected COVID-19, please visit Considerations for Inpatient Obstetric Healthcare Settings.
For infection prevention and control considerations for other pediatric healthcare facilities, please visit Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings.
The decision to manage a pediatric patient with mild to moderate COVID-19 in the outpatient or inpatient setting should be decided on a case-by-case basis.
Pediatric healthcare providers should consider the patients clinical presentation, requirement for supportive care, underlying conditions, and the ability for parents or guardians to care for the child at home.
For more information on home care of patients not requiring hospitalization visit: Interim Guidance for Implementing Home Care of People Not Requiring Hospitalization for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
There have been limited data on which underlying conditions in children might increase their risk of infection or disease severity.
People of all ages, including children and adolescents, with certain underlying medical conditions such as chronic lung disease or moderate to severe asthma, serious heart conditions (e.g congenital heart defects), immunocompromised conditions (e.g cancer undergoing treatment), severe obesity (body mass index BMI≥40), diabetes, chronic kidney disease on dialysis or liver disease might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 and should be monitored for symptoms or signs of concern by their caregivers at home and by their clinical providers.
Severe complications associated with COVID-19 in pediatric patients have not been well-described.
However, the treatment of severe and critical cases of pediatric patients with COVID-19 in the hospital may include management of pneumonia, respiratory failure, exacerbation of underlying conditions, sepsis or septic shock, or secondary bacterial infection.
Situations in which a patient requires prolonged hospitalization may also result in secondary nosocomial infections.
The National Institutes of Health recently published guidelines on prophylaxis use, testing, and management of COVID-19 patients.
For more information, please visit: National Institutes of Health: Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Treatment Guidelinesexternal icon.
The recommendations in the guidelines were based on scientific evidence and expert opinion and will be updated as more data becomes available.
The World Health Organization has published guidelines for the management of adult and pediatric patients with COVID-19 in the inpatient setting or ICU.
For more information visit: Interim Guidance on Clinical Management of Severe Acute Respiratory Infection when Novel Coronavirus (nCoV) Infection is Suspected (WHO)external icon.
The Surviving Sepsis Campaign has published guidelines for the management of septic shock and sepsis-associated organ dysfunction in children.
For more information visit: Surviving Sepsis Campaign International Guidelines for the Management of Septic Shock and Sepsis-Associated Organ Dysfunction in Childrenexternal icon.
For information regarding discontinuing transmission-based precautions and disposition of patients with COVID-19 in healthcare settings, please see: Discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions and Disposition of Patients with COVID-19 in Healthcare Settings (Interim Guidance)
For information about clinical trials involving remdesivir or other investigational therapeutics, please visit Information for Clinicians on Therapeutic Options for COVID-19 Patients .
Revisions were made on April 4, 2020, to reflect the following:
Guidance has been updated to clarify the following:
These infection prevention and control considerations are for healthcare facilities providing obstetric care for pregnant patients with confirmed coronavirus disease (COVID-19) or pregnant persons under investigation (PUI) in inpatient obstetric healthcare settings including obstetrical triage, labor and delivery, recovery and inpatient postpartum settings.
This information is intended to aid hospitals and clinicians in applying broader CDC interim guidance on infection control (Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) or Persons Under Investigation for COVID-19 in Healthcare Settings).
Since maternity and newborn care units vary in physical configuration, each facility should consider their appropriate space and staffing needs to prevent transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19.
These considerations include appropriate isolation of pregnant patients who have confirmed COVID-19 or are PUIs; basic and refresher training for all healthcare personnel on those units to include correct adherence to infection control practices and personal protective equipment (PPE) use and handling; sufficient and appropriate PPE supplies positioned at all points of care; and processes to protect newborns from risk of COVID-19.
These considerations are based upon the limited evidence available to date about transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19, and knowledge of other viruses that cause severe respiratory illness including influenza, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV).
The approaches outlined below are intentionally cautious until additional data become available to refine recommendations for prevention of person-to-person transmission in inpatient obstetric care settings.
The many benefits of mother/infant skin-to-skin contact are well understood for mother-infant bonding, increased likelihood of breastfeeding, stabilization of glucose levels, and maintaining infant body temperature and though transmission of SARS-CoV-2 after birth via contact with infectious respiratory secretions is a concern, the risk of transmission and the clinical severity of SARS-CoV-2 infection in infants are not clear.
The determination of whether or not to separate a mother with known or suspected COVID-19 and her infant should be made on a case-by-case basis using shared decision-making between the mother and the clinical team.
Considerations in this decision include:
If separation is not undertaken, other measures to reduce the risk of transmission from mother to infant could include the following, again, utilizing shared decision-making:
If the decision is made to temporarily put the mother with known or suspected COVID-19 and her infant to reduce the risk of transmission in separate rooms, the following should be considered:
1 Hand hygiene includes use of alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains 60% to 95% alcohol before and after all patient contact, contact with potentially infectious material, and before putting on and upon removal of PPE, including gloves.
Hand hygiene can also be performed by washing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
If hands are visibly soiled, use soap and water before returning to alcohol-based hand sanitizer.
Below are changes to the guidance as of April 13, 2020:
This interim guidance has been updated based on currently available information about COVID-19 and the current situation in the United States, which includes community transmission, infections identified in healthcare personnel (HCP), and shortages of facemasks, N95 filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs) (commonly known as N95 respirators), eye protection, gloves, and gowns.
Mode of transmission: Current data suggest person-to-person transmission most commonly happens during close exposure to a person infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, primarily via respiratory droplets produced when the infected person speaks, coughs, or sneezes.
Droplets can land in the mouths, noses, or eyes of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs of those within close proximity.
Transmission also might occur through contact with contaminated surfaces followed by self-delivery to the eyes, nose, or mouth.
The contribution of small respirable particles, sometimes called aerosols or droplet nuclei, to close proximity transmission is currently uncertain.
However, airborne transmission from person-to-person over long distances is unlikely.
Recent experience with outbreaks in nursing homes has reinforced that residents with COVID-19 frequently do not report typical symptoms such as fever or respiratory symptoms; some may not report any symptoms.
Unrecognized asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic infections likely contribute to transmission in these and other healthcare settings.
Source control, which involves having the infected person wear a cloth face covering or facemask over their mouth and nose to contain their respiratory secretions, might help reduce the risk of transmission of SARS CoV-2 from both symptomatic and asymptomatic people.
This guidance is applicable to all U.S. healthcare settings.
This guidance is not intended for non-healthcare settings (e.g schools) OR for persons outside of healthcare settings.
For recommendations regarding clinical management, air or ground medical transport, or laboratory settings, refer to the main CDC COVID-19 website.
Shortage of personal protective equipment: Controlling exposures to sources of occupational infections is a fundamental method of protecting HCP.
Traditionally, a hierarchy of controls has been used as a means of determining how to implement feasible and effective control solutions.
The hierarchy ranks controls according to their reliability and effectiveness and includes engineering controls, administrative controls, and ends with personal protective equipment (PPE).
PPE is the least effective control because it involves a high level of worker involvement and is highly dependent on proper fit and correct, consistent use.
Major distributors in the United States have reported shortages of PPE, including N95 respirators, facemasks, eye protection, gowns, and gloves.
Healthcare facilities are responsible for protecting their HCP from exposure to pathogens, including by providing appropriate PPE.
In times of shortages, alternatives to N95s should be considered, including powered air-purifying respirators (PAPRs), other classes of disposable FFRs, elastomeric half-mask, and full facepiece air-purifying respirators where feasible.
Special care should be taken to ensure that respirators are reserved for situations where respiratory protection is most important, such as performance of aerosol generating procedures on patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 or provision of care to patients with other infections for which respiratory protection is strongly indicated (e.g tuberculosis, measles, varicella).
The anticipated timeline for return to routine levels of PPE is not yet known.
Information about strategies to optimize the current supply of N95 respirators, including the use of devices that provide higher levels of respiratory protection (e.g powered air-purifying respirators PAPRs) when N95s are in limited supply and a companion summary list to help healthcare facilities prioritize the implementation of the strategies, is available.
Strategies to optimize the supply of other PPE and equipment, including tools to calculate the burn rate of PPE are also available.
Capacity across the healthcare continuum: Use of N95 or higher-level respirators are recommended for HCP who have been medically cleared, trained, and fit tested, in the context of a facilitys respiratory protection programexternal icon.
However, the majority of nursing homes and outpatient clinics, including hemodialysis facilities, do not have respiratory protection programs nor have they fit tested HCP, making use of respirators currently unachievable.
Without an alternative, this can lead to transfer of patients with known or suspected COVID-19 to another facility (e.g acute care hospital) for evaluation and care.
In areas with community transmission, acute care facilities could be quickly overwhelmed by transfers of patients who have only mild illness and do not require hospitalization.
To address potential for an increased number of patients seeking healthcare, guidance for establishing Alternate Care Sitespdf iconexternal icon has been created.
Many of the recommendations described in this guidance (e.g triage procedures, source control) should already be part of an infection control program designed to prevent transmission of seasonal respiratory infections.
As it might be challenging to distinguish COVID-19 from other respiratory infections, interventions will need to be applied broadly and not limited to patients with confirmed COVID-19.
This guidance is applicable to all U.S. healthcare settings.
This guidance is not intended for non-healthcare settings (e.g schools) OR for persons outside of healthcare settings.
For recommendations regarding clinical management, air or ground medical transport, or laboratory settings, refer to the main CDC COVID-19 website.
Healthcare Personnel (HCP): HCP include, but are not limited to, emergency medical service personnel, nurses, nursing assistants, physicians, technicians, therapists, phlebotomists, pharmacists, students and trainees, contractual staff not employed by the healthcare facility, and persons not directly involved in patient care, but who could be exposed to infectious agents that can be transmitted in the healthcare setting (e.g clerical, dietary, environmental services, laundry, security, engineering and facilities management, administrative, billing, and volunteer personnel).
Cloth face covering: Textile (cloth) covers that are intended to keep the person wearing one from spreading respiratory secretions when talking, sneezing, or coughing.
They are not PPE and it is uncertain whether cloth face coverings protect the wearer.
Guidance on design, use, and maintenance of cloth face coverings is available.
Facemask: Facemasks are PPE and are often referred to as surgical masks or procedure masks.
Use facemasks according to product labeling and local, state, and federal requirements.
FDA-cleared surgical masks are designed to protect against splashes and sprays and are prioritized for use when such exposures are anticipated, including surgical procedures.
Facemasks that are not regulated by FDA, such as some procedure masks, which are typically used for isolation purposes, may not provide protection against splashes and sprays.
Respirator: A respirator is a personal protective device that is worn on the face, covers at least the nose and mouth, and is used to reduce the wearers risk of inhaling hazardous airborne particles (including dust particles and infectious agents), gases, or vapors.
Respirators are certified by the CDC/NIOSH, including those intended for use in healthcare.
Refer to the Appendix for a summary of different types of respirators.
Ensure facility policies and practices are in place to minimize exposures to respiratory pathogens including SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
Measures should be implemented before patient arrival, upon arrival, throughout the duration of the patients visit, and until the patients room is cleaned and disinfected.
It is particularly important to protect individuals at increased risk for adverse outcomes from COVID-19 (e.g older individuals with comorbid conditions), including HCP who are in a recognized risk category.
Continued community transmission has increased the number of individuals potentially exposed to and infectious with SARS-CoV-2.
Fever and symptom screening have proven to be relatively ineffective in identifying all infected individuals, including HCP.
Symptom screening also will not identify individuals who are infected but otherwise asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic; additional interventions are needed to limit the unrecognized introduction of SARS-CoV-2 into healthcare settings by these individuals.
As part of aggressive source control measures, healthcare facilities should consider implementing policies requiring everyone entering the facility to wear a cloth face covering (if tolerated) while in the building, regardless of symptoms.
This approach is consistent with a recommendation to the general public advising them to wear a cloth face covering whenever they must leave their home.
Patients and visitors should, ideally, be wearing their own cloth face covering upon arrival to the facility.
If not, they should be offered a facemask or cloth face covering as supplies allow, which should be worn while they are in the facility (if tolerated).
They should also be instructed that if they must touch or adjust their cloth face covering they should perform hand hygiene immediately before and after.
Facemasks and cloth face coverings should not be placed on young children under age 2, anyone who has trouble breathing, or anyone who is unconscious, incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Patients may remove their cloth face covering when in their rooms but should put them back on when leaving their room or when others (e.g HCP, visitors) enter the room.
Screening for symptoms and appropriate triage, evaluation, and isolation of individuals who report symptoms should still occur.
As part of source control efforts, HCP should wear a facemask at all times while they are in the healthcare facility.
When available, facemasks are generally preferred over cloth face coverings for HCP as facemasks offer both source control and protection for the wearer against exposure to splashes and sprays of infectious material from others.
If there are anticipated shortages of facemasks, facemasks should be prioritized for HCP and then for patients with symptoms of COVID-19 (as supply allows).
Cloth face coverings should NOT be worn instead of a respirator or facemask if more than source control is required.
Some HCP whose job duties do not require PPE (e.g clerical personnel) might continue to wear their cloth face covering for source control while in the healthcare facility.
Other HCP (e.g nurses, physicians) might wear their cloth face covering for part of the day when not engaged in direct patient care activities, only switching to a respirator or facemask when PPE is required.
To avoid risking self-contamination, HCP should consider continuing to wear their respirator or facemask (extended use) instead of intermittently switching back to their cloth face covering.
Of note, N95s with an exhaust valve might not provide source control.
HCP should remove their respirator or facemask and put on their cloth face covering when leaving the facility at the end of their shift.
They should also be instructed that if they must touch or adjust their facemask or cloth face covering they should perform hand hygiene immediately before and after.
HCP should have received job-specific training on PPE and demonstrated competency with selection and proper use (e.g putting on and removing without self-contamination).
Because cloth face coverings can become saturated with respiratory secretions, care should be taken to prevent self-contamination.
They should be changed if they become soiled, damp, or hard to breathe through, laundered regularly (e.g daily and when soiled), and, hand hygiene should be performed immediately before and after any contact with the cloth face covering.
Facilities should also provide training about when, how, and where cloth face coverings can be used (e.g frequency of laundering, guidance on when to replace, circumstances when they can be worn in the facility, importance of hand hygiene to prevent contamination).
Standard Precautions assume that every person is potentially infected or colonized with a pathogen that could be transmitted in the healthcare setting.
Elements of Standard Precautions that apply to patients with respiratory infections, including COVID-19, are summarized below.
Attention should be paid to training and proper donning (putting on), doffing (taking off), and disposal of any PPE.
This document does not emphasize all aspects of Standard Precautions (e.g injection safety) that are required for all patient care; the full description is provided in the Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing Transmission of Infectious Agents in Healthcare Settings.
HCP (see Section 5 for measures for non-HCP visitors) who enter the room of a patient with known or suspected COVID-19 should adhere to Standard Precautions and use a respirator (or facemask if a respirator is not available), gown, gloves, and eye protection.
When available, respirators (instead of facemasks) are preferred; they should be prioritized for situations where respiratory protection is most important and the care of patients with pathogens requiring Airborne Precautions (e.g tuberculosis, measles, varicella).
Information about the recommended duration of Transmission-Based Precautions is available in the Interim Guidance for Discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions and Disposition of Hospitalized Patients with COVID-19
Download the  Print-only PDFpdf icon

Employers should select appropriate PPE and provide it to HCP in accordance with OSHA PPE standards (29 CFR 1910 Subpart I)external icon.
HCP must receive training on and demonstrate an understanding of:
Any reusable PPE must be properly cleaned, decontaminated, and maintained after and between uses.
Facilities should have policies and procedures describing a recommended sequence for safely donning and doffing PPE.
The PPE recommended when caring for a patient with known or suspected COVID-19 includes:
Information about Airborne Infection Isolation Rooms (AIIRs):
Filtering Facepiece Respirators (FFR) including N95 Respirators
This page was updated on April 23, 2020 to align with the revised Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings.
Who is this for: Healthcare personnel who may care for patients who are confirmed with or under investigation for COVID-19.
What is it for: This creates FAQs to support the existing Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control Guidance for COVID-19.
How is it used: To assist healthcare facilities in preventing transmission of COVID-19 in healthcare settings.
Facilities should follow the reporting requirements of their state or jurisdiction.
Those regulated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) (e.g nursing homes) should also follow all CMS requirementspdf iconexternal icon, which are being updated to include new requirements for reporting to CDC and to residents and their representatives.
In addition, CDC recommends that health departments be promptly notified about:
These could signal an outbreak of COVID-19 or other respiratory disease in the facility.
The health department can provide important guidance to assist with case finding and halting transmission.
The facility should also have a plan and mechanism to regularly communicate with residents, family members, and HCP, including if cases of COVID-19 are identified in the facility.
Often, information in nursing homes is communicated through town hall meetings and staff meetings, along with letters or emails.
However, during the COVID-19 pandemic, in-person gatherings should not occur.
Instead, communication should occur through virtual meetings over phone or web platforms.
These should be supplemented with written communications that provide contact information for a staff member who can respond to questions or concerns.
Communications should include information describing the current situation, plans for limiting spread within the facility, and recommended actions they can take to protect themselves and others.
Facilities should make this information available in a timely manner and offer periodic updates as the situation develops and more information becomes available.
No.
For patients hospitalized with COVID-19, decisions about discharge from the hospital should be based on their clinical status and the ability of the accepting facility to meet their care needs and adhere to recommended infection prevention and control practices.
Decisions about hospital discharge are distinct from decisions about discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions.
For patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, decisions about discontinuing Transmission-Based Precautions can be based on either a test-based or non-test-based strategy as outlined here.
Test-based strategies are preferred, but NOT REQUIRED, and might not be possible due to limitations on availability of testing.
If a patient with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 has not met criteria for discontinuing Transmission-Based Precautions, they should be transferred to a facility with the ability to adhere to infection prevention and control recommendations for the care of residents with COVID-19, including placement in a unit or area of the facility designated to care for residents with COVID-19 and provision of recommended personal protective equipment to healthcare personnel.
If the patient with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 has met the criteria for discontinuing Transmission-Based Precautions but has persistent symptoms (e.g persistent cough), they should ideally be placed in a single room and be restricted to their room until they have returned to baseline or until 14 days after illness onset, whichever is longer.
If the patient has met the criteria for discontinuing Transmission-Based Precautions and does not have persistent symptoms, they do not require additional restrictions.
A patient hospitalized for non-COVID-related illnesses whose COVID-19 status is not known can be transferred to a nursing home without testing.
However, to ensure they are not infected, nursing homes should place them in Transmission-based Precautions in a separate observation area or in a single-person room until 14 days have elapsed since admission.
As part of universal source control measures, all residents (including those described in the scenarios above) should wear a cloth face covering or facemask whenever they leave their room.
As part of routine practices, all healthcare personnel (HCP) should be applying Standard Precautions.
HCP should always deliberately assess potential risks of exposure to infectious material before engaging in activities and procedures in healthcare delivery.
Based on their risk assessment at the point of care, safe work practices including administrative controls,  engineering controls that reduce the production or release of infectious material, and personal protective equipment (PPE) should be applied to the activity according to CDC guidelines and standards of practice.
To reduce SARS-CoV-2 exposure during the COVID-19 pandemic, CDC recommends that facilities:
If surgery or procedures cannot be postponed, HCP caring for patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 should adhere to all recommended infection prevention and control practices for COVID-19.
In the context of COVID-19, some infected individuals might not be identified based on clinical signs and symptoms.
CDCs guidance to use NIOSH-approved N95 disposable filtering facepiece or higher level respirators when providing care for patients with suspected or known COVID-19 is based on the current understanding of SARS-CoV-2 and related respiratory viruses.
Current data suggest that close-range aerosol transmission by droplet and inhalation, and contact followed by self-delivery to the eyes, nose, or mouth are likely routes of transmission.
Long-range aerosol transmission, such as is seen with measles, has not been a feature of SARS-CoV-2.
Potential routes of close-range transmission include splashes and sprays of infectious material onto mucous membranes and inhalation of infectious virions exhaled by an infected person.
The relative contribution of each of these is not known for SARS-Co-V-2.
Facemasks commonly used during surgical procedures will provide barrier protection against droplet sprays contacting mucous membranes of the nose and mouth, but they are not designed to protect wearers from inhaling small particles.
N95 and higher level respirators, such as other disposable filtering facepiece respirators, powered air-purifying respirators (PAPRs), and elastomeric respirators, provide both barrier and respiratory protection because of their tight fit and filtration characteristics.
Respirators should be used as part of a respiratory protection program that provides staff with medical evaluations, training, and fit testing.
Although facemasks are routinely used for the care of patients with common viral respiratory infections, N95 or higher level respirators are routinely recommended for emerging pathogens like SARS CoV-2, which have the potential for transmission via small particles, the ability to cause severe infections, and no specific treatments or vaccines.
CDC recommendations acknowledge the current challenges with limited supplies of N95s and other respirators.
Facilities that do not have sufficient supplies of N95s and other respirators for all patient care should prioritize their use for activities and procedures that pose high risks of generating infectious aerosols and use facemasks for care that does not involve those activities or procedures.
Detailed strategies for optimizing the supply of N95 respirators are available on the CDC website.
Once availability of supplies is reestablished, the guidance states that the use of N95 and higher level respirators should resume.
In general, transport and movement of the patient outside of their room should be limited to medically essential purposes.
If being transported outside of the room, such as to radiology, healthcare personnel (HCP) in the receiving area should be notified in advance of transporting the patient.
For transport, the patient should wear a facemask or cloth face covering to contain secretions and be covered with a clean sheet.
If transport personnel must prepare the patient for transport (e.g transfer them to the wheelchair or gurney), transport personnel should wear all recommended PPE (gloves, a gown, respiratory protection that is at least as protective as a fit tested NIOSH-certified disposable N95 filtering facepiece respirator or facemask—if a respirator is not available—and eye protection i.e goggles or disposable face shield that covers the front and sides of the face).
This recommendation is needed because these interactions typically involve close, often face-to-face, contact with the patient in an enclosed space (e.g patient room).
Once the patient has been transferred to the wheelchair or gurney (and prior to exiting the room), transporters should remove their gown, gloves, and eye protection and perform hand hygiene.
If the patient is wearing a facemask or cloth face covering, no recommendation for PPE is made typically for HCP transporting patients with a respiratory infection from the patients room to the destination.
However, given current limitations in knowledge regarding COVID-19 and following the currently cautious approach for risk stratification and monitoring of healthcare personnel caring for patients with COVID-19, use of a facemask by the transporter is recommended for anything more than brief encounters with COVID-19 patients.
Additional PPE should not be required unless there is an anticipated need to provide medical assistance during transport (e.g helping the patient replace a dislodged facemask).
After arrival at their destination, receiving personnel (e.g in radiology) and the transporter (if assisting with transfer) should perform hand hygiene and wear all recommended PPE.
If still wearing their original respirator or facemask, the transporter should take care to avoid self-contamination when donning the remainder of the recommended PPE.
This cautious approach will be refined and updated as more information becomes available and as response needs change in the United States.
Interim guidance for EMS personnel transporting patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 is available here.
EMS personnel should wear all recommended PPE because they are providing direct medical care and in close contact with the patient for longer periods of time.
Standard Precautions should be followed when caring for any patient, regardless of suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
Patients with even mild symptoms1 that might be consistent with COVID-19 (e.g cough, sore throat, shortness of breath, muscle aches) should be cared for by HCP wearing all recommended PPE for the patient encounter (gloves, a gown, respiratory protection that is at least as protective as a fit tested NIOSH-certified disposable N95 filtering facepiece respirator or facemask—if a respirator is not available—and eye protection i.e goggles or disposable face shield that covers the front and sides of the face).
Recent studies indicate that people who are infected but do not have symptoms likely also play a role in the spread of COVID-19.
This underscores the importance of applying prevention practices to all patients including social distancing, hand hygiene, and surface decontamination.
In addition, universal source control2 is recommended by everyone entering a healthcare facility.
If the patient is without even mild COVID-19 symptoms then precautions specific to COVID-19 are not required but could be considered by regions experiencing high incidence of COVID-19 in the community.
1 Note: In addition to cough and shortness of breath, nonspecific symptoms such as sore throat, myalgia, fatigue, nausea, and diarrhea have been noted as initial symptoms in some cases of COVID-19.
These symptoms can have several alternative explanations; however, failure to identify and implement proper precautions in a healthcare setting for persons infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 can contribute to widespread transmission in that facility due to the presence of susceptible patients and close interactions with healthcare personnel.
For this reason, a lower temperature of 100.0oF and the inclusion of mild and non-specific symptoms should be used by healthcare personnel evaluating these patients to increase the ability to detect even mild cases of COVID-19.
2 Cloth face coverings are not considered PPE because their capability to protect HCP is unknown.
Facemasks, if available, should be reserved for HCP.
For visitors and patients, a cloth face covering may be appropriate.
If a visitor or patient arrives to the healthcare facility without a cloth face cover, a facemask may be used for source control if supplies are available.
In general, only essential personnel should enter the room of patients with COVID-19.
Healthcare facilities should consider assigning daily cleaning and disinfection of high-touch surfaces to nursing personnel who will already be in the room providing care to the patient.
If this responsibility is assigned to EVS personnel, they should wear all recommended PPE when in the room.
PPE should be removed upon leaving the room, immediately followed by performance of hand hygiene.
After discharge, terminal cleaning may be performed by EVS personnel.
They should delay entry into the room until a sufficient time has elapsed for enough air changes to remove potentially infectious particles.
We do not yet know how long SARS-CoV-2 remains infectious in the air.
Regardless, EVS personnel should refrain from entering the vacated room until sufficient time has elapsed for enough air changes to remove potentially infectious particles (more information on clearance rates under differing ventilation conditions is available).
After this time has elapsed, EVS personnel may enter the room and should wear a gown and gloves when performing terminal cleaning.
A facemask (if not already wearing for source control) and eye protection should be added if splashes or sprays during cleaning and disinfection activities are anticipated or otherwise required based on the selected cleaning products.
Shoe covers are not recommended at this time for personnel caring for patients with COVID-19.
Some procedures performed on patients are more likely to generate higher concentrations of infectious respiratory aerosols than coughing, sneezing, talking, or breathing.
These aerosol generating procedures (AGPs) potentially put healthcare personnel and others at an increased risk for pathogen exposure and infection.
Development of a comprehensive list of AGPs for healthcare settings has not been possible, due to limitations in available data on which procedures may generate potentially infectious aerosols and the challenges in determining if reported transmissions during AGPs are due to aerosols or other exposures.
There is neither expert consensus, nor sufficient supporting data, to create a definitive and comprehensive list of AGPs for healthcare settings.
Commonly performed medical procedures that are often considered AGPs, or that create uncontrolled respiratory secretions, include:
Based on limited available data, it is uncertain whether aerosols generated from some procedures may be infectious, such as:
*Aerosols generated by nebulizers are derived from medication in the nebulizer.
It is uncertain whether potential associations between performing this common procedure and increased risk of infection might be due to aerosols generated by the procedure or due to increased contact between those administering the nebulized medication and infected patients.
References related to aerosol generating procedures:
Tran K, Cimon K, Severn M, Pessoa-Silva CL, Conly J (2012) Aerosol Generating Procedures and Risk of Transmission of Acute Respiratory Infections to Healthcare Workers: A Systematic Review.
PLoS ONE 7(4); https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3338532/#!po=72.2222external iconexternal icon).
The collection of nasopharyngeal (NP) swabs from patients with known or suspected COVID-19 can be performed in a regular examination room with the door closed.
Use of an airborne infection isolation room for nasopharyngeal specimen collection is not required.
HCP in the room should wear an N95 or higher-level respirator (or facemask if a respirator is not available), eye protection, gloves, and a gown.
If respirators are not readily available, they should be prioritized for other procedures at higher risk for producing infectious aerosols (e.g intubation), instead of for collecting NP swabs.
No.
Updated CDC Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings recommends placing patients in a regular examination room with the door closed.
Airborne infection isolation rooms should be reserved for patients undergoing aerosol generating procedures or for diagnoses such as active tuberculosis.
Although spread of SARS-CoV-2 is believed to be primarily via respiratory droplets, the contribution of small respirable particles to close proximity transmission is currently uncertain.
Airborne transmission from person-to-person over long distances is unlikely.
The amount of time that the air inside an examination room remains potentially infectious is not known and may depend on a number of factors including the size of the room, the number of air changes per hour, how long the patient was in the room, if the patient was coughing or sneezing, and if an aerosol-generating procedure was performed.
Facilities will need to consider these factors when deciding when the vacated room can be entered by someone who is not wearing PPE.
For a patient who was not coughing or sneezing, did not undergo an aerosol-generating procedure, and occupied the room for a short period of time (e.g a few minutes), any risk to HCP and subsequent patients likely dissipates over a matter of minutes.
However, for a patient who was coughing and remained in the room for a longer period of time or underwent an aerosol-generating procedure, the risk period is likely longer.
For these higher risk scenarios, it is reasonable to apply a similar time period as that used for pathogens spread by the airborne route (e.g measles, tuberculosis) and to restrict HCP and patients without PPE from entering the room until sufficient time has elapsed for enough air changes to remove potentially infectious particles.
General guidance on clearance rates under differing ventilation conditions is available.
In addition to ensuring sufficient time for enough air changes to remove potentially infectious particles, HCP should clean and disinfect environmental surfaces and shared equipment before the room is used for another patient.
CDC has released information about strategies to optimize the supply of isolation gowns.
Healthcare facilities should refer to that guidance and implement the recommended strategies to optimize their current supply of gowns.
This includes shifting toward the use of washable cloth gowns, if feasible.
The use of gowns as part of Contact Precautions in the context of MDROs has been implemented primarily to reduce the risk of transmission to other patients rather than to protect healthcare personnel (HCP).
Facilities with shortages could consider suspending the use of gowns for the care of patients with endemic MDROs, such as MRSA, VRE, and ESBL-producing Gram-negative bacilli except as required for Standard Precautions.
Facilities should assess their local epidemiology to determine which MDROs are considered endemic.
Regardless of the use of gowns, HCP at facilities should continue to wear gloves for contact with these patients and their environment.
Hand hygiene should continue to be emphasized.
Facilities should also attempt to place patients colonized or infected with an MDRO in a private room, if available.
check circle solid icon Patients with confirmed or possible SARS-CoV-2 infection should wear a facemask when being evaluated medically
check circle solid icon Healthcare personnel should adhere to Standard and Transmission-based Precautions when caring for patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Recommended PPE is described in the Infection Control Guidance
U.S. Healthcare Facilities: Optimize the Supply of PPE and Equipment
More than one donning method may be acceptable.
Training and practice using your healthcare facilitys procedure is critical.
Below is one example of donning.
More than one doffing method may be acceptable.
Training and practice using your healthcare facilitys procedure is critical.
Below is one example of doffing.
* Facilities implementing reuse or extended use of PPE will need to adjust their donning and doffing procedures to accommodate those practices.
How to Put On and Take Off PPE – Fact Sheet 8.5 x 11 pdf iconPDF – 1 page
How to Put On and Take Off PPE – Poster 11×17 pdf iconPDF – 1 page
PPE Illustrations  pdf iconPDF – 1 page
CDC recommendations reflect the important role of hand hygiene for preventing the transmission of pathogens in healthcare settings for a wide range of pathogens.
The ability of hand hygiene, including hand washing or the use of alcohol-based hand sanitizers to prevent infections is related to reductions in the number of viable pathogens that transiently contaminate the hands.
Hand washing mechanically removes pathogens, while laboratory data demonstrate that 60% ethanol and 70% isopropanol, the active ingredients in CDC-recommended alcohol-based hand sanitizers, inactivates viruses that are genetically related to, and with similar physical properties as, the 2019-nCoV.
While the exact role of direct and indirect spread of coronaviruses between people that could be reduced by hand hygiene is unknown at this time, hand hygiene for infection prevention is an important part of the U.S. response to the international emergence of COVID-19.
CDC recommends the use of alcohol-based hand sanitizers with greater than 60% ethanol or 70% isopropanol as the preferred form of hand hygiene in healthcare settings, based upon greater access to hand sanitizer.
Health care providers who use alcohol-based hand sanitizers as part of their hand hygiene routine can inform patients that they are following CDC guidelines.
The CDC continues to recommend the use of alcohol-based hand rub (ABHR) as the primary method for hand hygiene in most clinical situations1.
ABHR effectively reduces the number of pathogens that may be present on the hands of healthcare personnel after brief interactions with patients or the care environment.
In addition, frequent use of ABHR formulated with emollients is less damaging to the skin than frequent hand washing.
This factor, along with ease of use and greater access, leads to greater overall compliance with use of ABHR than hand washing with soap and water.
Hands should be washed for at least 20 seconds with soap and water when visibly soiled, before eating, and after using the restroom.
CDC does not have a recommended alternative to hand rub products with greater than 60% ethanol or 70% isopropanol as active ingredients.
Benzalkonium chloride, along with both ethanol and isopropanol, is deemed eligible by FDAexternal icon for use in the formulation of healthcare personnel hand rubs2.
However, available evidence indicates benzalkonium chloride has less reliable activity against coronavirus than either of the alcohols3.
Healthcare organizations that encounter severe shortages of ABHR (and have exhausted supply chain access to efficacious products) may consider local production of formulations as described by the FDA Policy for Compounding of Certain Alcohol-Based Hand Sanitizer Productsexternal icon.
This policy remains in effect through April 30, 2020.
Formulations included in the FDA guidance are consistent with World Health Organization production guidancepdf iconexternal icon.
These locally produced products are intended for routine healthcare personnel hand cleaning, must not contain active ingredients other than those specified in the FDA guidance, and should not take the place of other regulated skin antiseptics (e.g.
surgical hand rub).
To avoid contamination with spore-forming organisms, WHO formulations require a 72-hour post-production quarantine.
Organizations should revert to the use of commercially produced, FDA-approved product once such supplies again become available.
Given the drying effect of alcohols and the importance of maintaining skin integrity of healthcare personnel with their need to perform hand hygiene frequently, alcohols should not be used unless properly formulated with emollients.
Infection Prevention and Control Considerations for Alternate Care Sites
An increase in the number of patients seeking medical care might require jurisdictions to establish alternate care sites (ACS) where patients with COVID-19 can receive medical care for the duration of their isolation period.
These are typically established in non-traditional environments, such as converted hotels or mobile field medical units.1  Depending on the jurisdictional needs, ACS could provide two levels of care:
The expected duration of care for patients in ACS would be based on their clinical needs and the timeline for discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions.
If ACS will be used to care for both confirmed and suspected COVID-19 patients, or for patients without COVID-19 who require care for other reasons, additional infection prevention and control considerations will apply.
For example, planning would need to address physical separation between the cohorts and assignment of different healthcare personnel (HCP) with dedicated equipment to each section.
This guidance provides critical infection prevention and control (IPC) considerations for ACS and is intended to supplement existing plans (created by jurisdictions as part of pandemic planning).
It does not address other important aspects of an ACS, such as supplies, accessibility (e.g doors are wide enough for wheelchairs and stretchers), or patient transportation to and from nearby healthcare facilities.
Jurisdictions should consider how close the ACS is to nearby healthcare facilities, including acute care hospitals, and may need to have agreements in place with surrounding healthcare facilities regarding patient transfer.
A toolkitpdf iconexternal icon to provide technical assistance for jurisdictions establishing and operationalizing ACS is also available.
1https://asprtracie.hhs.gov/technical-resources/48/alternate-care-sites-including-shelter-medical-care/47external icon
This interim guidance outlines goals and strategies suggested for U.S. ambulatory care settings in response to community spread of coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19).
Ambulatory care settings are where health services or acute care services are provided on an outpatient basis and can include community health centers, urgent care centers, retail clinics co-located in pharmacies, grocery stores, or mass merchants, hospital-based outpatient clinics, non-hospital-based clinics and physician offices, and public health clinics.
These settings, particularly those which offer primary care services, play an important role in the healthcare systems response to the COVID-19 outbreak.
This guidance reflects the need to 1) minimize disease transmission to patients, healthcare personnel (HCP) and others, 2) identify persons with presumptive COVID-19 disease and implement a triage procedure to assign appropriate levels of care, 3) reduce negative impacts on emergency department and hospital bed capacity and 4) maximize the efficiency of personal protective equipment (PPE) utilization across the community health system while protecting healthcare personnel.
Public health guidance will shift as the COVID-19 outbreak evolves.
All healthcare facilities should be aware of updates to local and state public health recommendations.
These recommendations should be used with the CDCs Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings.
This information is provided to clarify COVID-19 infection prevention and control (IPC) recommendations that are specific to ambulatory care settings.
This information complements, but does not replace, the general IPC recommendations for COVID-19.
Currently there are no FDA-approved medications to treat or vaccines to prevent COVID-19.
Therefore, community approaches to slowing transmission such as social distancing, and reducing face-to-face contact with potential COVID-19 cases are needed to slow disease transmission and reduce the number of people who get sick.
In each healthcare facility, the primary goals include:
Several major impacts can be anticipated during a severe outbreak that could affect the operations of healthcare facilities.
These include surges in patients seeking care, the potential for workforce absenteeism for personal or family illness, and effects from community mitigation approaches such as school closures.
Healthcare facilities will likely need to adjust the way they triage, assess, and care for patients by using methods that do not rely on face-to-face care.
Facilities can reduce exposure of HCP to ill persons and minimize surge on facilities by shifting practices to triaging and assessing ill patients (including those affected by COVID-19 and patients with other conditions) remotely using nurse advice lines, provider visits by telephone, text monitoring systems, video conferences, or other telehealth and telemedicine methods.
Many clinics and medical offices already use these methods to triage and manage patients after hours and as part of usual practices.
Recent reports suggest that approximately 80% of COVID-19 patients (of all ages) have experienced mild illness (Wu et al 2020external icon).
Managing persons at home who are ill with mild disease can reduce the strain on healthcare systems, however, these patients will need careful triage and monitoring.
Shifts in the way that healthcare is delivered during a COVID-19 outbreak response will be complex.
Thorough and consistent communications between all components of the public health and healthcare system will be needed in every community.
Providers in medical offices, clinics, and other outpatient settings should be informed and know their roles as they evolve.
Pre-hospital care by emergency management services (EMS) and public-safety answering points (PSAPs) will also need to be coordinated and consistent with current transport guidance so they can conduct in-home assessments and triage per local guidance.
Additional telehealth information by region and state can be found at the National Consortium of Telehealth Resource Centersexternal icon and the Center for Connected Health Policyexternal icon).
Given their congregate nature and population served, assisted living facilities (ALFs) are at high risk of COVID-19 spreading and affecting their residents.
If infected with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, assisted living residents—often older adults with underlying chronic medical conditions—are at increased risk of serious illness.
CDC is aware of suspected and confirmed cases of COVID-19 among residents of ALFs in multiple states.
Recent experience with outbreaks in nursing homes has also reinforced that residents with COVID-19 may not report typical symptoms such as fever or respiratory symptoms; some may not report any symptoms.
Unrecognized asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic infections likely contribute to transmission in these settings.
Because of this, CDC is recommending that the general public wear a cloth face covering for source control whenever they leave their home.
Updates were also made to CDCs Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings to address universal source control for everyone in a healthcare facility.
Refer to that guidance for more detailed recommendations, including when facemasks versus cloth face coverings could be used.
CDC has released Interim Additional Guidance for Infection Prevention and Control for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed COVID-19 in Nursing Homes.
Many of the recommended actions to prepare for COVID-19 described in that guidance also apply to ALFs.
CDC has also released guidance Interim Guidance for Preventing the Spread of COVID-19 in Retirement Communities and Independent Living Facilities.
However, as states are responsible for licensing and regulating ALFs, the structure and care provided within ALFs can be distinctly different from that of nursing homes.
As such, implementing that guidance might present some unique challenges or additional considerations state by state.
For example, the care provided in ALFs can vary greatly by the extent and type of supervision and provision of skilled nursing services.
Full- or part-time nursing staff are typically not required in ALFs, and residents may receive care from contract healthcare personnel (HCP) or use outpatient providers.
Because staff at many of these facilities are generally not trained to provide medical care, their access to and training to use recommended personal protective equipment (PPE) and their ability to care for residents with COVID-19 is limited.
Many ALFs will not have access to an Infection Preventionist or professional nursing staff that can assist with COVID-19 preparation, prevention, and control efforts.
Further, because the care and documentation of resident conditions may not be centralized within the facility, identification of a cluster or residents with fever or respiratory symptoms might be delayed.
Cloth face covering: Textile (cloth) covers that are intended to keep the person wearing one from spreading respiratory secretions when talking, sneezing, or coughing.
They are not PPE and it is uncertain whether cloth face coverings protect the wearer.
Guidance on design, use, and maintenance of cloth face coverings is available.
Facemask: Facemasks are PPE and are often referred to as surgical masks or procedure masks.
Use facemasks according to product labeling and local, state, and federal requirements.
FDA-cleared surgical masks are designed to protect against splashes and sprays and are prioritized for use when such exposures are anticipated, including surgical procedures.
Facemasks that are not regulated by FDA, such as some procedure masks, which are typically used for isolation purposes, may not provide protection against splashes and sprays.
Respirator: A respirator is a personal protective device that is worn on the face, covers at least the nose and mouth, and is used to reduce the wearers risk of inhaling hazardous airborne particles (including dust particles and infectious agents), gases, or vapors.
Respirators are certified by the CDC/NIOSH, including those intended for use in healthcare.
Refer to the Appendix for a summary of different types of respirators.
To prepare for COVID-19 in their facilities, ALFs should take the following actions:
Educate residents, family members, and personnel about COVID-19: 
Keep COVID-19 from entering the facility:
Implement recommended infection prevention and control practices:
Rapidly identify and properly respond to residents with suspected or confirmed COVID-19:
Older people with COVID-19 may not show typical symptoms such as fever or respiratory symptoms.
Atypical symptoms may include: new or worsening malaise, new dizziness, or diarrhea.
Identification of these symptoms should prompt isolation and further evaluation for COVID-19.
Interim Additional Guidance for Infection Prevention and Control for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed COVID-19 in Nursing Homes
Strategies to Optimize the Supply of PPE and Equipment
Interim U.S.
Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure in a Healthcare Setting to Patients with Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19)
Discontinuation of Transmission-Based Precautions and Disposition of Patients with COVID-19 in Healthcare Settings (Interim Guidance)
Criteria for Return to Work for Healthcare Personnel with Confirmed or Suspected COVID-19 (Interim Guidance)
It is essential to continue collecting blood and blood components to support healthcare delivery.
This guidance is for administration, staff, and volunteers at blood and plasma collection facilities.
Public health guidance may shift.
Be aware of updates to local and state public health recommendations and if COVID-19 becomes more widespread and/or more clinically severe.
CDC is working with FDA, state and local health departments, and other HHS agencies to monitor COVID-19 and its potential impact on blood availability and blood safety.
CDC and other HHS agencies are also continuing to work with the AABB Interorganizational Disaster Task Force to enhance preparednesspdf iconexternal icon.
This information reinforces routine measures that are currently followed by blood centers, provides additional public health measures, and complements CDCs interim infection prevention and control recommendations.
Refer to FDAs recommendations for donor and product managementexternal icon.
These measures will help prevent the spread of COVID-19.
Adhere to routine infection control procedures, including appropriate respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette and sharps handling precautions for preventing the transmission of infectious agents.
Follow hand hygiene guidance to help prevent person-to-person spread of COVID-19 and other respiratory viruses.
Staff should wash hands with soap and water between contacts with different blood donors.
If gloves are used, change gloves and cleanse hands between contact with different blood donors.
With regard to staff safety, the wearing of gloves and hand cleansing are governed by OSHA requirements pertaining to bloodborne pathogens in 29 CFR 1910.1030(c)(3)(ix) and 29 CFR 1910.1030 (d)(iii)–(vi) respectively.
Clean and disinfect environmental surfaces in accordance with standard facility protocols after each donor has vacated the station and before setting up for arrival of a new donor at that station.
Ensure that environmental cleaning and disinfection procedures are followed consistently and correctly.
Routine cleaning and disinfection procedures are appropriate in healthcare settings, including those patient-care areas in which aerosol-generating procedures are performed (e.g using cleaners and water to pre-clean surfaces prior to applying an EPA-registered, hospital-grade disinfectant to frequently touched surfaces or objects for appropriate contact times as indicated on the products label).
Refer to List N for EPA-registered disinfectantsexternal icon that have qualified under EPAs emerging viral pathogens program for use against SARS-CoV-2.
Assess yourself each day before leaving for work for symptoms consistent with COVID-19.
If experiencing COVID-19-like symptoms, remain at home and contact the established point of contact (public health authorities or their facilitys occupational health program) for medical evaluation prior to returning to work.
If symptoms develop while at work, cease collection facility activities, notify supervisor, minimize contact with others in facility, and go home promptly.
Follow current recommendations for the screening and potential deferral of blood and plasma donors, available in FDAs Updated Information for Blood Establishments Regarding the Novel Coronavirus Outbreakexternal icon.
Interim Infection Prevention and Control Guidance for Dental Settings During the COVID-19 Response
Revisions were made on April 7, 2020
During the COVID-19 pandemic, dental emergencies2 will arise and may require treatment by DHCP.
DHCP should regularly consult their state dental boards or other regulating agencies for requirements specific to their jurisdictions, as information is changing rapidly.
The following dental-specific recommendations should be used with CDCs Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for patients with COVID-19 and the Interim Additional Guidance for Outpatient and Ambulatory Care Settings: Responding to Community Transmission of COVID-19 in the United States.
This information supplements, but does not replace, the general infection prevention and control recommendations for COVID-19.
SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, is thought to be spread primarily through respiratory droplets.
Airborne transmission from person-to-person over long distances is unlikely.
However, the contribution of aerosols, or droplet nuclei, to close proximity transmission is currently uncertain.
The virus has been shown to survive in aerosols for hours and on surfaces for days.
There are also indications that patients may be able to spread the virus while pre-symptomatic or asymptomatic.
The practice of dentistry involves the use of rotary dental and surgical instruments such as handpieces or ultrasonic scalers and air-water syringes.
These instruments create a visible spray that contains large particle droplets of water, saliva, blood, microorganisms, and other debris.
This spatter travels only a short distance and settles out quickly, landing on the floor, nearby operatory surfaces, DHCP, or the patient.
The spray also might contain certain aerosols.
Surgical masks protect mucous membranes of the mouth and nose from droplet spatter, but they do not provide complete protection against inhalation of airborne infectious agents.
There are currently no data available to assess the risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission during dental practice or to determine whether DHCP are adequately protected when providing dental treatment using Standard Precautions.
To date in the United States, clusters of healthcare workers positive for COVID-19 have been identified in hospital settings and long-term care facilities, but no clusters have yet been reported in dental settings or personnel.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administrations Guidance on Preparing Workplaces for COVID-19pdf iconexternal icon places DHCP in the very high exposure risk category, as their jobs are those with high potential for exposure to known or suspected sources of the virus that causes COVID-19 during specific procedures.
When practicing in the absence of Airborne Precautions, the risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission during aerosol generating dental procedures cannot be eliminated.
Caring for patients requiring Airborne Precautions is not possible in most dental settings as they are not designed for or equipped to provide this standard of care.
For example, most dental settings do not have airborne infection isolation rooms or single-patient rooms, do not have a respiratory protection program, and do not routinely stock N95 respirators.
Services should be limited to emergency visits only during this period of the pandemic.
These actions help staff and patients stay safe, preserve personal protective equipment and patient care supplies, and expand available health system capacity.
This recommendation aligns with the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services (CMS) Adult Elective Surgery and Procedures Recommendationspdf iconexternal icon, which states to limit all non-essential planned surgeries and procedures, including dental, until further notice.
Implement sick leave policies for DHCP that are flexible, non-punitive, and consistent with public health guidance, allowing employees to stay home if they have symptoms of respiratory infection.
Ask staff to stay home if they are sick and send staff home if they develop symptoms while at work.
Telephone screen all patients for signs or symptoms of respiratory illness (fever3, cough, shortness of breath).
If the patient reports signs or symptoms of a respiratory illness, avoid dental care.
If possible, delay emergency dental care until the patient has recovered from the respiratory infection.
Telephone triage all patients in need of emergency dental care.
Assess the patients dental condition and determine whether the patient needs to be seen in the dental clinic.
Use teleconferencing or teledentistry options as alternatives to in office care.
If dental treatment can be delayed, provide patients with detailed home care instructions and any appropriate pharmaceuticals.
Provision of Emergency Care to Patients with COVID-19 During the COVID-19 Pandemic
If a patient arrives at your facility and is suspected or confirmed to have COVID-19, take the following actions:
If emergency dental care is medically necessary for a patient who has, or is suspected of having COVID-19, Airborne Precautions (an isolation room with negative pressure relative to the surrounding area and use of an N95 filtering disposable respirator for persons entering the room) should be followed.
Dental treatment should be provided in a hospital or other facility that can treat the patient using the appropriate precautions.
Provision of Emergency Care to Patients Without COVID-19 in a Dental Clinic During the COVID-19 Pandemic
If a patient must be seen in the dental clinic for emergency care, systematically assess the patient at the time of check-in.
The patient should be asked about the presence of symptoms of a respiratory infection and history of travel to areas experiencing transmission of COVID-19 or contact with possible patients with COVID-19.
If the patient is afebrile (temperature &lt; 100.4˚F) and otherwise without symptoms consistent with COVID-19, then emergency dental care may be provided using appropriate engineering controls, work practices, and infection control practices.
Use the highest level of personal protective equipment (PPE) available:
People with COVID-19 who have completed home isolation clearance can receive emergency dental care.
This is decided using two strategies: a non-test-based strategy, and a test-based-strategy:
Even when DHCP screen patients for respiratory infections, they may treat a dental emergency patient who is later confirmed to have COVID-19.
DHCP should institute a policy to contact all patients who received emergency dental care in the dental setting 48 hours after receiving emergency care.
DHCP should ask patients if they are exhibiting any signs or symptoms of COVID-19.
If a patient reports signs or symptoms of COVID-19, refer the patient to their medical provider for assessment and follow CDCs Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure Guidance.
Major distributors in the United States have reported shortages of PPE, especially surgical masks and respirators.
The anticipated timeline for return to routine levels of PPE is not yet known.
CDC has developed a series of strategies or options to optimize supplies of PPE in healthcare settings when there is limited supply, and a burn rate calculator that provides information for healthcare facilities to plan and optimize the use of PPE for response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
These policies are only intended to remain in effect during the time of the COVID-19 pandemic.
During severe resource limitations, consider excluding DHCP who may be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, such as those of older age, those with chronic medical conditions, or those who may be pregnant, from performing emergency dental care.
1DHCP refers to all paid and unpaid persons serving in dental healthcare settings who have the potential for direct or indirect exposure to patients or infectious materials, including:
2The urgency of a procedure is a decision based on clinical judgement and should be made on a case-by-case basis.
3Fever may be subjective or confirmed.
4A respirator is a personal protective device that is worn on the face, covers at least the nose and mouth, and is used to reduce the wearers risk of inhaling hazardous airborne particles (including dust particles and infectious agents), gases, or vapors.
Respirators are certified by the CDC/NIOSH, including those intended for use in healthcare.
Respirator use must be in the context of a complete respiratory protection program in accordance with OSHA Respiratory Protection standard (29 CFR 1910.134external iconexternal icon).
Healthcare Providers should be medically cleared and fit tested if using respirators with tight-fitting facepieces (e.g a NIOSH-approved N95 respirator) and trained in the proper use of respirators, safe removal and disposal, and medical contraindications to respirator use.
5All test results should be final before isolation is ended.
Testing guidance is based upon limited information and is subject to change as more information becomes available.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Outpatient Dialysis Facility Preparedness Assessment Toolpdf icon
Below are changes to the guidance as of April 12, 2020:
These recommendations should be used with the CDCs Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings.
This information is provided to clarify COVID-19 infection prevention and control (IPC) recommendations that are specific to outpatient hemodialysis facilities.
This information complements, but does not replace, the general IPC recommendations for COVID-19.
This guidance is based on the currently available information about COVID-19.
This approach will be refined and updated as more information becomes available and as response needs change in the United States.
It is important to stay informed about COVID-19 to prevent introduction and minimize spread of COVID-19 in your dialysis facility.
Consult with public health authorities to understand if community transmission of COVID-19 is occurring in your community.
As part of routine infection control, outpatient dialysis facilities should have established policies and practices to reduce the spread of contagious respiratory pathogens.
This includes the below information and additional recommendations on screening and triage.
Recent experience with outbreaks in nursing homes has reinforced that residents with COVID-19 may not report typical symptoms such as fever or respiratory symptoms; some may not report any symptoms.
Unrecognized asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic infections likely contribute to transmission in these settings and other healthcare settings.
Because of this, CDC is recommending that the general public wear a cloth face covering whenever they leave their home.
Updates were also made to CDCs Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings to address universal source control for everyone in a healthcare facility, including dialysis facilities.
Refer to that guidance for more detailed recommendations, including when facemasks versus cloth face coverings could be used.
Additionally, when COVID-19 is suspected or confirmed in a patient receiving hemodialysis, the following additional measures apply:
If a hemodialysis facility is dialyzing more than one patient with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, consideration should be given to cohorting these patients and the HCP caring for them together in the section of the unit and/or on the same shift (e.g consider the last shift of the day).
If the etiology of respiratory symptoms is known, patients with different etiologies should not be cohorted (for example, patients with confirmed influenza and COVID-19 should not be cohorted).
Current procedures for routine cleaning and disinfection of dialysis stations are appropriate for patients with COVID-19; however, it is important to validate that the product used for surface disinfection is active against SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19external icon.
Facilities should ensure they are following the manufacturers label instructions for proper use and dilution of the disinfectant.
The manufacturers instructions are specific to the product and should be followed (e.g this might not necessarily conform to a 1:100 or 1:10 dilution); some products do not require preparation or dilution and are sold as ready to use.
The product you are currently using may need to be used at a different concentration or a different contact time.
Staff should be educated, trained, and have competency assessed for all cleaning and disinfection procedures in the facility.
Ensure staff use appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) according to manufacturers recommendations when cleaning.
Ensure that routine cleaning and disinfection procedures are followed consistently and correctly for patients with fever or respiratory symptoms.
Key Strategies to Prepare for COVID-19 in Long-term Care Facilities (LTCFs)
COVID-19 cases have been reported in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and multiple U.S. territories; many having wide-spread community transmission.
Given the high risk of spread once COVID-19 enters a LTCF, facilities must act immediately to protect residents, families, and staff from serious illness, complications, and death.
Strategies include recommendations to:
Long-term care facilities concerned that a resident, visitor, or employee may be a COVID-2019 patient under investigation should contact their local or state health department immediately for consultation and guidance.
Updated guidance to recommend that nursing homes:
Given their congregate nature and resident population served (e.g older adults often with underlying chronic medical conditions), nursing home populations are at the highest risk of being affected by COVID-19.
If infected with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, residents are at increased risk of serious illness.
COVID-19 cases have now been reported in all 50 states and DC; with many areas having wide-spread community transmission.
Given the high risk of spread once COVID-19 enters a nursing home, facilities must take immediate action to protect residents, families, and healthcare personnel (HCP) from severe infections, hospitalizations, and death.
Visitors and HCP continue to be sources of introduction of COVID-19 into nursing homes.
To protect the vulnerable nursing home population, aggressive efforts toward visitor restrictions and implementing sick leave policies for ill HCP, and actively checking every person entering a facility for fever and symptoms of illness continue to be recommended.
Recent experience with outbreaks in nursing homes has also reinforced that residents with COVID-19 may not report typical symptoms such as fever or respiratory symptoms; some may not report any symptoms.
Unrecognized asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic infections likely contribute to transmission in these settings.
Because of this, CDC is recommending that the general public wear a cloth face covering for source control whenever they leave their home.
Updates were also made to CDCs Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings to address source control for everyone in a healthcare facility, including nursing homes.
Refer to that guidance for more detailed recommendations, including when facemasks versus cloth face coverings could be used.
This interim guidance focuses on the following priorities:
These recommendations supplement the CDCs Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)  in Healthcare Settings and are specific for nursing homes, including skilled nursing facilities.
This information complements, but does not replace, the general IPC recommendations for COVID-19.
Preparedness resources for assisted living facilities are available here.
This guidance is based on the currently available information about COVID-19.
This guidance will be refined and updated as more information becomes available and as response needs change in the United States.
COVID-19 Preparedness Checklist for Nursing Homes and other Long-Term Care Settings pdf icon1 MB, 8 pages
Guidance for Pharmacists and Pharmacy Technicians in Community Pharmacies during the COVID-19 Response
Below are changes to the guidance as of April 14, 2020:
This guidance applies to all pharmacy staff to minimize their risk of exposure to the virus and reduce the risk for customers during the COVID-19 pandemic.
As a vital part of the healthcare system, pharmacies play an important role in providing medicines, therapeutics, vaccines, and critical health services to the public.
Ensuring continuous function of pharmacies during the COVID-19 pandemic is important.
During the pandemic, pharmacy staff can minimize their risk of exposure to the virus that causes COVID-19 and reduce the risk for customers by using the principles of infection prevention and control and social distancing.
Make sure that pharmacy staff who have fever or symptoms that may be due to COVID-19 stay home and away from the workplace until they have recovered.
Ensure that sick leave policies are flexible, nonpunitive, and consistent with public health guidance and that employees are aware of and understand these policies.
Although the actual process of preparing medications for dispensing is not a direct patient care activity, the other components of medication dispensing such as prescription intake, patient counseling, or patient education may expose pharmacy staff to individuals who may have respiratory illness.
In addition to following workplace guidance, pharmacy staff should:
Pharmacies that are participating in public health testing for COVID-19 should communicate with local and state public health staff to determine which persons meet the criteria for testing.
State and local health departments will inform pharmacies about procedures to collect, store, and ship specimens appropriately, including during afterhours or on weekends/holidays.
Some pharmacies are including self-collection options.
In the CDC Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings, there is guidance for collecting respiratory specimens.
Pharmacy staff conducting COVID-19 testing and other close-contact patient care procedures that will likely elicit coughs or sneezes (e.g influenza and strep testing) should be provided with appropriate PPE.
Staff who use respirators must be familiar with proper use and follow a complete respiratory protection program that complies with OSHA Respiratory Protection standard (29 CFR 1910.134).
Staff should also have training in the appropriate donning and doffing of PPE.
Cloth face coverings should NOT be worn by staff instead of a respirator or facemask if more than source control is required.
This document is an update to interim guidance as of March 25, 2020 include:
CDC guidance for COVID-19 may be adapted by state and local health departments to respond to rapidly changing local circumstances.
Medical examiners, coroners, and pathologists should immediately notify their localexternal icon or state external iconhealth department in the event of the identification of a deceased person with known or suspected COVID-19.
State and local health departments who have identified a deceased known or suspected COVID-19 case can notify CDCs Emergency Operations Center (EOC) at 770-488-7100 for urgent consultation if an autopsy is being considered or submission of autopsy tissue specimens or postmortem swabs to CDC for COVID-19 testing is desired.
The EOC will assist local/state health departments to collect, store, and ship specimens appropriately to CDC, including during afterhours or on weekends/holidays.
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Current knowledge suggests that spread from a living person happens with close contact (i.e within about 6 feet) via respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks, similar to how influenza and other respiratory pathogens spread.
Recent studies indicate that people who are infected but do not have symptoms likely also play a role in the spread of COVID-19.
This route of transmission is not a concern when handling human remains or performing postmortem procedures.
It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes, but this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.
CDC will update this interim guidance as additional information becomes available.
This document provides specific guidance for the collection and submission of postmortem specimens from deceased known or suspected COVID-19 cases.
This document also provides recommendations for biosafety and infection control practices during specimen collection and handling, including during autopsy procedures.
The guidance can be utilized by medical examiners, coroners, pathologists, other workers involved in providing postmortem care, and local and state health departments.
Postmortem activities should be conducted with a focus on avoiding aerosol generating procedures and ensuring that if aerosol generation is likely (e.g when using an oscillating saw) that appropriate engineering controls and personal protective equipment (PPE) are used.
These precautions and the use of Standard Precautions should ensure that appropriate work practices are used to prevent direct contact with infectious material, percutaneous injury, and hazards related to moving heavy remains and handling embalming chemicals.
Medical examiners, coroners, and other healthcare professionals should use their judgment to determine if a decedent had signs and symptoms compatible with COVID-19 during life and whether postmortem testing should be pursued.
Most patients with confirmed COVID-19 have developed fever and/or symptoms of acute respiratory illness (e.g cough, difficulty breathing).
There are epidemiologic factors that may also help guide decisions about COVID-19 testing, such as documented COVID-19 infections in a jurisdiction, known community transmission, contact with a known COVID-19 case, or being a part of a cluster of respiratory illness in a closed setting (e.g a long-term care facility).
Testing for other causes of respiratory illness (e.g influenza) is strongly encouraged.
Recommendations about the type of postmortem specimens to collect vary based on whether the case of COVID-19 is suspected or confirmed, as well as whether an autopsy is performed.
The following factors should be considered when determining if an autopsy will be performed for a deceased known or suspected COVID-19 case: medicolegal jurisdiction, facility environmental controls, availability of recommended personal protective equipment (PPE), and family and cultural wishes.
If an autopsy is performed for a suspected COVID-19 case, collection of the following postmortem specimens is recommended:
If an autopsy is NOT performed for a suspected COVID-19 case, collection of the following postmortem specimens is recommended:
If an autopsy is performed for a confirmed COVID-19 case, collection of the following postmortem specimens should be considered:
In addition to postmortem specimens, any remaining specimens (e.g NP swab, sputum, serum, stool) that may have been collected prior to death should be retained.
Please refer to Interim Guidelines for Collecting, Handling, and Testing Clinical Specimens from Persons for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) for more information.
Instructions in this section apply if only postmortem NP swabs are being collected from a deceased person with known or suspected COVID-19.
If an autopsy is being performed or aerosol generating procedures (AGPs) are being conducted, instructions in the section Autopsy Procedures should be followed.
If only a postmortem NP swab is being collected, individuals in the room during specimen collection should be limited to healthcare personnel (HCP) obtaining the specimen.
HCP should follow Standard Precautions.
Since collection of nasopharyngeal swab specimens from deceased persons will not induce coughing or sneezing, a negative pressure room is not required if only a NP swab is being collected from the decedent.
Personnel should adhere to Standard Precautions as described above.
Since collection of nasopharyngeal swab specimens from deceased persons will not induce coughing or sneezing, NIOSH-certified disposable N-95 respirator or higher is not required if only a NP swab is being collected from the decedent.
The following PPE should be worn at a minimum:
Standard Precautions, Contact Precautions, and Airborne Precautions with eye protection (goggles or a face shield) should be followed during autopsy.
Many of the following procedures are consistent with existing guidelines for safe work practices in the autopsy setting; see Guidelines for Safe Work Practices in Human and Animal Medical Diagnostic Laboratories.
Autopsies on known or suspected COVID-19 cases should be conducted in Airborne Infection Isolation Rooms (AIIRs).
These rooms are at negative pressure to surrounding areas, have a minimum of 6 air changes per hour (ACH) for existing structures and 12 ACH for renovated or new structures, and have air exhausted directly outside or through a HEPA filter.
Doors to the room should be kept closed except during entry and egress.
If an AIIR is not available, ensure the room is negative pressure with no air recirculation to adjacent spaces.
A portable HEPA recirculation unit could be placed in the room to provide further reduction in aerosols.
Local airflow control (i.e laminar flow systems) can be used to direct aerosols away from personnel.
If use of an AIIR or HEPA unit is not possible, the procedure should be performed in the most protective environment possible.
Air should never be returned to the building interior, but should be exhausted outdoors, away from areas of human traffic or gathering spaces and away from other air intake systems.
The following PPE should be worn during autopsy procedures:
Surgical scrubs, shoe covers, and surgical cap should be used per routine protocols.
Doff (take off) PPEpdf icon carefully to avoid contaminating yourself and before leaving the autopsy suite or adjacent anteroom.
After removing PPE, discard the PPE in the appropriate laundry or waste receptacle.
Reusable PPE (e.g goggles, face shields, and PAPRs) must be cleaned and disinfected according to the manufacturers recommendations before reuse.
Immediately after doffing PPE, wash hands with soap and water for 20 seconds.
If hands are not visibly dirty and soap and water are not available, an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains 60%-95% alcohol may be used.
However, if hands are visibly dirty, always wash hands with soap and water before using alcohol-based hand sanitizer.
Avoid touching the face with gloved or unwashed hands.
Ensure that hand hygiene facilities are readily available at the point of use (e.g at or adjacent to the PPE doffing area).
If the PPE supply is low, see Strategies for Optimizing the Supply of PPE.
Additional safety and health guidance is available for workers handling deceased known or suspected COVID-19 cases at the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), COVID-19 websiteexternal icon.
Implementing proper biosafety and infection control practices is critical when collecting specimens.
Please refer to Interim Laboratory Biosafety Guidelines for Handling and Processing Specimens Associated with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) for additional information.
For suspected COVID-19 cases, CDC recommends collecting and testing postmortem nasopharyngeal swabs (NP swabs) and if an autopsy is performed, lower respiratory specimens (lung swabs).
If the diagnosis of COVID-19 was established before death, collection of these specimens for COVID-19 testing may not be necessary.
Medical examiners, coroners, and pathologists should work with their local or state health department to determine capacity for testing postmortem swab specimens.
Use only synthetic fiber swabs with plastic shafts.
Do not use calcium alginate swabs or swabs with wooden shafts, as they may contain substances that inactivate some viruses and inhibit PCR testing.
Place swabs immediately into sterile tubes containing 2-3 ml of viral transport media.
NP and lung swab specimens should be kept in separate vials.
Refrigerate specimen at 2-8°C and ship overnight to CDC on ice pack.
Store specimens at 2-8°C for up to 72 hours after collection.
If a delay in testing or shipping is expected, store specimens at -70°C or below.
Separate postmortem specimens (e.g NP or lung swabs) should be collected for routine testing of respiratory pathogens at either clinical or public health labs.
Note that clinical laboratories should NOT attempt viral isolation from specimens collected from known or suspected COVID-19 cases.
Other postmortem specimen collection and evaluations should be directed by the decedents clinical and exposure history, scene investigation, and gross autopsy findings, and may include routine bacterial cultures, toxicology, and other studies as indicated.
The preferred specimens would be a minimum of eight blocks and fixed tissue specimens representing samples from the respiratory sites listed below in addition to specimens from major organs (including liver, spleen, kidney, heart, GI tract) and any other tissues showing significant gross pathology.
Viral antigens and nucleic acid may be focal or sparsely distributed in patients with respiratory viral infections and are most frequently detected in respiratory epithelium of large airways.
For example, larger airways (particularly primary and segmental bronchi) have the highest yield for detection of respiratory viruses by molecular testing and immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining.
Performance of specific immunohistochemical, molecular, or other assays will be determined using clinical and epidemiologic information provided by the submitter and the histopathologic features identified in the submitted tissue specimens.
Collection of tissue samples roughly 4-5 mm in thickness (i.e sample would fit in a tissue cassette) is recommended for optimal fixation.
The volume of formalin used to fix tissues should be 10x the volume of tissue.
Place tissue in 10% buffered formalin for three days (72 hours) for optimal fixation.
After collecting and properly securing and labeling specimens in primary containers with the appropriate media/solution, they must be transferred from the autopsy suite in a safe manner to laboratory staff who can process them for shipping.
Medical examiners, coroners, and other healthcare professionals should work with their state and local health departments to coordinate testing through public health laboratories.
In addition, COVID-19 testing, authorized by the Food and Drug Administration under an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA), is becoming available in clinical laboratories.
State and local health departments can contact CDCs Emergency Operations Center (EOC) at 770-488-7100 for assistance with obtaining, storing, and shipping appropriate specimens to CDC for testing, including after hours or on weekends or holidays, if testing of postmortem swab specimens is not available in their public health laboratory.
This section applies to submission of postmortem NP swab and lung swabs
Postmortem swab specimens from known or suspected COVID-19 cases must be packaged, shipped, and transported according to the current edition of the International Air Transport Association (IATA) Dangerous Goods Regulationsexternal icon.
Additional useful and detailed information on packing, shipping, and transporting specimens can be found at Interim Laboratory Biosafety Guidelines for Handling and Processing Specimens Associated with Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19).
CDCs Infectious Diseases Pathology Branch (IDPB) can receive fixed autopsy tissue specimens from known or suspected COVID-19 cases.
IDPB will perform histopathologic evaluation; testing for COVID-19, as well as other respiratory viral pathogens (e.g influenza); and bacterial and other infections, as indicated.
In general, this is the preferred specimen and is especially important to submit in cases where tissues have been in formalin for a significant time.
Prolonged fixation (&gt;2 weeks) may interfere with some immunohistochemical and molecular diagnostic assays.
If available, we highly recommend that unprocessed tissues in 10% neutral buffered formalin be submitted in addition to paraffin blocks.
The following are general guidelines for cleaning and waste disposal following an autopsy of a decedent with confirmed or suspected COVID-19.
Current evidence suggests that novel coronavirus may remain viable for hours to days on surfaces made from a variety of materials.
Routine cleaning and disinfection procedures (e.g using cleaners and water to pre-clean surfaces prior to applying Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-approved disinfectant products with emerging viral pathogens claimsexternal icon that are expected to be effective against COVID-19 based on data for harder to kill viruses in these settings.
After an autopsy of a decedent with confirmed or suspected COVID-19, the following recommendations apply for the autopsy room (and anteroom if applicable):
Follow standard routine procedures when transporting the body after specimens have been collected and the body has been bagged.
Disinfect the outside of the bag with a product with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claimsexternal icon expected to be effective against COVID-19 applied according to the manufacturers recommendations.
Wear disposable nitrile gloves when handling the body bag.
Use this Excel spreadsheet to calculate your PPE burn rate
The Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Burn Rate Calculator excel icon3 sheets is a spreadsheet-based model that will help healthcare facilities plan and optimize the use of PPE for response to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Non-healthcare facilities such as correctional facilities may also find this tool useful.
To use the calculator, enter the number of full boxes of each type of PPE in stock (gowns, gloves, surgical masks, respirators, and face shields, for example) and the total number of patients at your facility.
The tool will calculate the average consumption rate, also referred to as a burn rate, for each type of PPE entered in the spreadsheet.
This information can then be used to estimate how long the remaining supply of PPE will last, based on the average consumption rate.
Using the calculator can help facilities make order projections for future needs.
* MS Windows and Office is a copyrighted product produced by Microsoft Corporation, based in Redmond, WA.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Before loading and starting the PPE Burn Rate Calculator, you may need to change Excels security level.
To do so:
We recommend downloading and saving the PPE Burn Rate Calculator spreadsheet to your computer before opening the spreadsheet.
Taking this step will open the spreadsheet in Excel rather than your web browser.
Audience: These considerations are intended for use by federal, state, and local public health officials; leaders in occupational health services and infection prevention and control programs; and other leaders in healthcare settings who are responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing pathogen transmission in healthcare settings.
Purpose: This document offers a series of strategies or options to optimize supplies of eye protection in healthcare settings when there is limited supply.
It does not address other aspects of pandemic planning; for those, healthcare facilities can refer to COVID-19 preparedness plans.
Surge capacity refers to the ability to manage a sudden, unexpected increase in patient volume that would otherwise severely challenge or exceed the present capacity of a facility.
While there are no commonly accepted measurements or triggers to distinguish surge capacity from daily patient care capacity, surge capacity is a useful framework to approach a decreased supply of eye protection during the COVID-19 response.
Three general strata have been used to describe surge capacity and can be used to prioritize measures to conserve eye protection supplies along the continuum of care.
The following contingency and crisis strategies are based upon these assumptions:
Use eye protection according to product labeling and local, state, and federal requirements.
Selectively cancel elective and non-urgent procedures and appointments for which eye protection is typically used by HCP.
Shift eye protection supplies from disposable to re-usable devices (i.e goggles and reusable face shields).
Implement extended use of eye protection.
Extended use of eye protection is the practice of wearing the same eye protection for repeated close contact encounters with several different patients, without removing eye protection between patient encounters.
Extended use of eye protection can be applied to disposable and reusable devices.
Cancel all elective and non-urgent procedures and appointments for which eye protection is typically used by HCP.
Use eye protection devices beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life during patient care activities.
If there is no date available on the eye protection device label or packaging, facilities should contact the manufacturer.
The user should visually inspect the product prior to use and, if there are concerns (such as degraded materials), discard the product.
Prioritize eye protection for selected activities such as:
Consider using safety glasses (e.g trauma glasses) that have extensions to cover the side of the eyes.
Exclude HCP at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 from contact with known or suspected COVID-19 patients.
Designate convalescent HCP for provision of care to known or suspected COVID-19 patients.
Adhere to recommended manufacturer instructions for cleaning and disinfection.
When manufacturer instructions for cleaning and disinfection are unavailable, such as for single use disposable face shields, consider:
Audience: These considerations are intended for use by federal, state, and local public health officials; leaders in occupational health services and infection prevention and control programs; and other leaders in healthcare settings who are responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing pathogen transmission in healthcare settings.
Purpose: This document offers a series of strategies or options to optimize supplies of isolation gowns in healthcare settings when there is limited supply.
It does not address other aspects of pandemic planning; for those, healthcare facilities can refer to COVID-19 preparedness plans.
Surge capacity refers to the ability to manage a sudden, unexpected increase in patient volume that would otherwise severely challenge or exceed the present capacity of a facility.
While there are no widely accepted measurements or triggers to distinguish surge capacity from daily patient care capacity, surge capacity is a useful framework to approach a decreased supply of isolation gowns during the COVID-19 response.
Three general strata have been used to describe surge capacity and can be used to prioritize measures to conserve isolation gown supplies along the continuum of care.
The following contingency and crisis strategies are based upon these assumptions:
Use isolation gown alternatives that offer equivalent or higher protection.
Several fluid-resistant and impermeable protective clothing options are available in the marketplace for HCP.
These include isolation gowns and surgical gowns.
When selecting the most appropriate protective clothing, employers should consider all of the available information on recommended protective clothing, including the potential limitations.
Nonsterile, disposable patient isolation gowns, which are used for routine patient care in healthcare settings, are appropriate for use by HCP when caring for patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
In times of gown shortages, surgical gowns should be prioritized for surgical and other sterile procedures.
Current U.S. guidelines do not require use of gowns that conform to any standards.
Selectively cancel elective and non-urgent procedures and appointments for which a gown is typically used by HCP.
Shift gown use towards cloth isolation gowns.
Reusable (i.e washable) gowns are typically made of polyester or polyester-cotton fabrics.
Gowns made of these fabrics can be safely laundered according to routine procedures and reused.
Care should be taken to ensure that HCP do not touch outer surfaces of the gown during care.
Consider the use of coveralls.
Coveralls typically provide 360-degree protection because they are designed to cover the whole body, including the back and lower legs, and sometimes the head and feet as well.
While the material and seam barrier properties are essential for defining the protective level, the coverage provided by the material used in the garment design, as well as certain features including closures, will greatly affect the protective level.
HCP unfamiliar with the use of coveralls must be trained and practiced in their use, prior to using during patient care.
In the United States, the NFPA 1999 standardexternal icon specifies the minimum design, performance, testing, documentation, and certification requirements for new single-use and new multiple-use emergency medical operations protective clothing, including coveralls for HCP.
Use of expired gowns beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life for training.
The majority of isolation gowns do not have a manufacturer-designated shelf life.
However, consideration can be made to using gowns that do and are past their manufacturer-designated shelf life.
If there is no date available on the gown label or packaging, facilities should contact the manufacturer.
Use gowns or coveralls conforming to international standards.
Current guidelines do not require use of gowns that conform to any standards.
In times of shortages, healthcare facilities can consider using international gowns and coveralls.
Gowns and coveralls that conform to international standards, including with EN 13795 and EN14126, could be reserved for activities that may involve moderate to high amounts of body fluids.
Cancel all elective and non-urgent procedures and appointments for which a gown is typically used by HCP.
Extended use of isolation gowns.
Consideration can be made to extend the use of isolation gowns (disposable or cloth) such that the same gown is worn by the same HCP when interacting with more than one patient known to be infected with the same infectious disease when these patients housed in the same location (i.e COVID-19 patients residing in an isolation cohort).
This can be considered only if there are no additional co-infectious diagnoses transmitted by contact (such as Clostridioides difficile) among patients.
If the gown becomes visibly soiled, it must be removed and discarded as per usual practicespdf icon.
Re-use of cloth isolation gowns.
Disposable gowns are not typically amenable to being doffed and re-used because the ties and fasteners typically break during doffing.
Cloth isolation gowns could potentially be untied and retied and could be considered for re-use without laundering in between.
In a situation where the gown is being used as part of standard precautions to protect HCP from a splash, the risk of re-using a non-visibly soiled cloth isolation gown may be lower.
However, for care of patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, HCP risk from re-use of cloth isolation gowns without laundering among (1) single HCP caring for multiple patients using one gown or (2) among multiple HCP sharing one gown is unclear.
The goal of this strategy is to minimize exposures to HCP and not necessarily prevent transmission between patients.
Any gown that becomes visibly soiled during patient care should be disposed of and cleaned.
Prioritize gowns.
Gowns should be prioritized for the following activities:
Surgical gowns should be prioritized for surgical and other sterile procedures.
Facilities may consider suspending use of gowns for endemic multidrug resistant organisms (e.g MRSA, VRE, ESBL-producing organisms).
Consider using gown alternatives that have not been evaluated as effective.
In situation of severely limited or no available isolation gowns, the following pieces of clothing can be considered as a last resort for care of COVID-19 patients as single use.
However, none of these options can be considered PPE, since their capability to protect HCP is unknown.
Preferable features include long sleeves and closures (snaps, buttons) that can be fastened and secured.
Reusable patient gowns and lab coats can be safely laundered according to routine procedures.
Audience: These considerations are intended for use by federal, state, and local public health officials; leaders in occupational health services and infection prevention and control programs; and other leaders in healthcare settings who are responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing pathogen transmission in healthcare settings.
Purpose: This document offers a series of strategies or options to optimize supplies of facemasks in healthcare settings when there is limited supply.
It does not address other aspects of pandemic planning; for those, healthcare facilities can refer to COVID-19 preparedness plans.
Surge capacity refers to the ability to manage a sudden, unexpected increase in patient volume that would otherwise severely challenge or exceed the present capacity of a facility.
While there are no commonly accepted measurements or triggers to distinguish surge capacity from daily patient care capacity, surge capacity is a useful framework to approach a decreased supply of facemasks during the COVID-19 response.
Three general strata have been used to describe surge capacity and can be used to prioritize measures to conserve facemask supplies along the continuum of care.
The following contingency and crisis strategies are based upon these assumptions:
Use facemasks according to product labeling and local, state, and federal requirements.
Selectively cancel elective and non-urgent procedures and appointments for which a facemask is typically used by HCP.
Remove facemasks for visitors in public areas.
Healthcare facilities can consider removing all facemasks from public areas.
Facemasks can be available to provide to symptomatic patients upon check in at entry points.
All facemasks should be placed in a secure and monitored site.
This is especially important in high-traffic areas like emergency departments.
Extended use of facemasks is the practice of wearing the same facemask for repeated close contact encounters with several different patients, without removing the facemask between patient encounters.
Restrict facemasks to use by HCP, rather than patients for source control.
Have patients with symptoms of respiratory infection use tissues or other barriers to cover their mouth and nose.
Cancel all elective and non-urgent procedures and appointments for which a facemask is typically used by HCP.
Use facemasks beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life during patient care activities.
If there is no date available on the facemask label or packaging, facilities should contact the manufacturer.
The user should visually inspect the product prior to use and, if there are concerns (such as degraded materials or visible tears), discard the product.
Implement limited re-use of facemasks.
Limited re-use of facemasks is the practice of using the same facemask by one HCP for multiple encounters with different patients but removing it after each encounter.
As it is unknown what the potential contribution of contact transmission is for SARS-CoV-2, care should be taken to ensure that HCP do not touch outer surfaces of the mask during care, and that mask removal and replacement be done in a careful and deliberate manner.
Prioritize facemasks for selected activities such as:
Exclude HCP at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 from contact with known or suspected COVID-19 patients.
During severe resource limitations, consider excluding HCP who may be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, such as those of older age, those with chronic medical conditions, or those who may be pregnant, from caring for patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 infection.
Designate convalescent HCP for provision of care to known or suspected COVID-19 patients.
It may be possible to designate HCP who have clinically recovered from COVID-19 to preferentially provide care for additional patients with COVID-19.
Individuals who have recovered from COVID-19 infection may have developed some protective immunity, but this has not yet been confirmed.
Use a face shield that covers the entire front (that extends to the chin or below) and sides of the face with no facemask.
Consider use of expedient patient isolation rooms for risk reduction.
Portable fan devices with high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration that are carefully placed can increase the effective air changes per hour of clean air to the patient room, reducing risk to individuals entering the room without respiratory protection.
NIOSH has developed guidance for using portable HEPA filtration systems to create expedient patient isolation rooms.
The expedient patient isolation room approach involves establishing a high-ventilation-rate, negative pressure, inner isolation zone that sits within a clean larger ventilated zone.
Consider use of ventilated headboards
NIOSH has developed the ventilated headboard that draws exhaled air from a patient in bed into a HEPA filter, decreasing risk of HCP exposure to patient-generated aerosol.
This technology consists of lightweight, sturdy, and adjustable aluminum framing with a retractable plastic canopy.
The ventilated headboard can be deployed in combination with HEPA fan/filter units to provide surge isolation capacity within a variety of environments, from traditional patient rooms to triage stations, and emergency medical shelters.
HCP use of homemade masks:
In settings where facemasks are not available, HCP might use homemade masks (e.g bandana, scarf) for care of patients with COVID-19 as a last resort.
However, homemade masks are not considered PPE, since their capability to protect HCP is unknown.
Caution should be exercised when considering this option.
Homemade masks should ideally be used in combination with a face shield that covers the entire front (that extends to the chin or below) and sides of the face.
Audience: These considerations are intended for use by federal, state, and local public health officials, respiratory protection program managers, leaders in occupational health services and infection prevention and control programs, and other leaders in healthcare settings who are responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing pathogen transmission in healthcare settings.
Purpose: This document offers a series of strategies or options to optimize supplies of disposable N95 filtering facepiece respirators (commonly called N95 respirators) in healthcare settings when there is limited supply.
It does not address other aspects of pandemic planning; for those, healthcare  facilities can refer to COVID-19 preparedness plans.
The strategies are also listed in order of priority and preference in the Checklist for Healthcare Facilities:  Strategies for Optimizing the Supply of N95 Respirators during the COVID-19 Response in an easy-to-use format for healthcare facilities.
Controlling exposures to occupational hazards is a fundamental way to protect personnel.
Conventionally, a hierarchy has been used to achieve feasible and effective controls.
Multiple control strategies can be implemented concurrently and or sequentially.
This hierarchy can be represented as follows:
To prevent infectious disease transmission, elimination (physically removing the hazard) and substitution (replacing the hazard) are not typically options for healthcare settings.
However, exposures to transmissible respiratory pathogens in healthcare facilities can often be reduced or possibly avoided through engineering and administrative controls and PPE.
Prompt detection and effective triage and isolation of potentially infectious patients are essential to prevent unnecessary exposures among patients, healthcare personnel (HCP), and visitors at the facility.
N95 respirators are the PPE most often used to control exposures to infections transmitted via the airborne route, though their effectiveness is highly dependent upon proper fit and use.
The optimal way to prevent airborne transmission is to use a combination of interventions from across the hierarchy of controls, not just PPE alone.
Applying a combination of controls can provide an additional degree of protection, even if one intervention fails or is not available.
Respirators, when required to protect HCP from airborne contaminants such as some infectious agents, must be used in the context of a comprehensive, written respiratory protection program that meets the requirements of OSHAs Respiratory Protection standardexternal icon.
The program should include medical evaluations, training, and fit testing.
Surge capacity refers to the ability to manage a sudden, unexpected increase in patient volume that would otherwise severely challenge or exceed the present capacity of a facility.
While there are no commonly accepted measurements or triggers to distinguish surge capacity from daily patient care capacity, surge capacity is a useful framework to approach a decreased supply of N95 respirators during the COVID-19 response.
Three general strata have been used to describe surge capacity and can be used to prioritize measures to conserve N95 respirator supplies along the continuum of care.1
Engineering controls reduce exposures for HCP by placing a barrier between the hazard and the HCP.
Engineering controls can be very effective as part of a suite of strategies to protect HCP without placing primary responsibility of implementation on them (i.e they function without HCP having to take an action).
Aerosol-generating procedures performed on patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 patients should take place in an airborne infection isolation room (AIIR).
The AIIR should be constructed and maintained in accordance with current guidelines, as recommended in CDCs COVID-19 interim prevention and control recommendations in healthcare settings.
Air from these rooms should be exhausted directly to the outside or be filtered through a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter directly before recirculation.
Air from these rooms should be exhausted directly to the outside or be filtered through a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter directly before recirculation.
Barriers such as glass or plastic windows can be an effective solution for reducing exposures among HCP to potentially infectious patients.
This approach can be effective in reception areas (e.g intake desk at emergency department, triage station, information booth, pharmacy drop-off/pick-up windows) where patients may first report upon arrival to a healthcare facility.
Other examples include the use of curtains between patients in shared areas and closed suctioning systems for airway suctioning for intubated patients.
Another cornerstone of engineering controls are ventilation systems that provide air movement from a clean (HCP workstation or area) to contaminated (sick patient) flow direction (along with appropriate filtration, exchange rate) that are installed and properly maintained.
Administrative controls are employer-dictated work practices and policies that reduce or prevent hazardous exposures.
Their effectiveness depends on employer commitment and HCP acceptance and consistent use of the strategies.
Develop mechanisms to screen patients for acute respiratory illness prior to their healthcare visits, such as through the appointment reminder system.
Postpone and reschedule those with signs and symptoms presenting for non-acute visits.
Nurse advice lines and telemedicine can screen and manage patients with suspected COVID-19 without the need for a face-to-face visit.
Promoting the use of these technologies and referral networks can help triage persons to the appropriate level of care, potentially reducing the influx of patients to healthcare facilities and reserving personal protective equipment for when it is needed.
CDC guidance recommends that, for COVID-19, only essential personnel enter the patient care area, and that facilities consider caring for these patients with dedicated HCP.
Further limiting the numbers of healthcare personnel and patient contacts to those that are medically essential (e.g excluding dietary personnel, environmental services) could limit the number of respirators used.
The medically essential personnel would assume food delivery and environmental services.
Measures can be explored to limit face-to-face contact encounters between HCP and patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19.
HCP may consider bundling care activities to minimize room entries, and bundling may occur across HCP types (e.g food trays are delivered by HCP performing other care).
Alternative mechanisms for HCP and patient interactions include telephones, video monitoring, and video-call applications on cell phones or tablets.
Restrict visitors from entering the rooms of patients with known COVID-19 or suspected COVID-19, as recommended in CDCs guidance.
Alternative mechanisms for patient and visitor interactions, such as video-call applications on cell phones or tablets should be explored.
Facilities can consider exceptions based on end-of-life situations or when a visitor is essential for the patients emotional well-being and care.
If visitors must enter the room of a known or suspected COVID-19 patient, facilities should provide instruction, before visitors enter patients rooms on use of PPE according to current facility policy while in the patients room.
Identify and assess patients who may be ill with or who may have been exposed to a person with known COVID-19.
Patients with symptoms of suspected COVID-19 or other respiratory infection (e.g fever, cough) presenting for care should use facemaskspdf icon for source control until they can be placed in a private room.
Instructions should include how to use facemasks.
Patients with these symptoms should not wear N95 respirators.
If these patients need to leave their room for services in other areas of the hospital (e.g radiology), they should also wear facemasks for source control.
Cohorting is the practice of grouping together patients who are infected with the same organism to confine their care to one area and prevent contact with other patients.
Cohorts are created based on clinical diagnosis, microbiologic confirmation when available, epidemiology, and mode of transmission of the infectious agent.
Cohorting has been used extensively for managing outbreaks of multidrug resistant organisms including MRSA, VRE, MDR-ESBLs, Pseudomonas aeruginosa; methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus, RSV, adenovirus keratoconjunctivitis, rotavirus, and SARS.
When single patient rooms are not available, patients with confirmed COVID-19 may be placed in the same room.
Cohorting patients could minimize respirator use when extended wear of respirators is implemented.
For more information on cohorting of patients, refer to 2007 Guideline for Isolation  Precautions: Preventing Transmission of Infectious Agents in Healthcare Settingspdf icon.
Assigning designated teams of HCP to provide care for all patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 could minimize respirator use when extended wear of respirators is implemented.
This strategy can also limit the number of exposed HCP who need to be fit tested.
It is important that HCP be trained on indications for use of N95 respirators.
The OSHA Respiratory Protection standard requires employers to provide respirator training to an employee prior to use in the workplace.
For example, HCP should be educated on the use of N95 respirators when caring for patients managed with airborne precautions, and other instances for respirator use, such as the performance of aerosol generating procedures.
Training employees on the proper use of respirators, including putting on and removing them, limitations on their use, and maintenance is essential for effective use of respiratory protection.
HCP should be thoroughly trained before they are fit tested to ensure they are comfortable donning the respirator and know how to conduct a user seal check.
HCP should be trained on the respirator they are expecting to use at work.
Just-in-time fit testing refers to the capacity of healthcare facilities to do larger scale evaluation, training, and fit testing of employees when necessary during a pandemic.
Facilities may adopt a plan to use the just-in-time method for fit testing, which has been incorporated into pandemic plans for many facilities.
For large facilities, it may not be feasible to fit test all employees, especially if their job does not typically place them at risk for exposure to airborne infectious diseases such as tuberculosis.
If healthcare facilities are expecting to receive COVID-19 patients, they should begin training and start to plan for fit testing now.
It is essential to have HCP trained and fit tested prior to receiving patients.
In order to conserve the supply of N95 respirators, healthcare facilities should understand which of their HCP need to be in a respiratory protection program and thus medically evaluated, trained, and fit tested.
If training and fit testing are conducted during two separate steps, it is possible to allow limited re-use of N95 respirators used by individual HCP during training and then fit testing.
Employees should be fit tested after they are comfortable donning the respirator and have passed a user seal check.
The respirator might also be saved and then used for patient care.
Respirator fit test methods are classified as either qualitative or quantitative, and there are multiple protocols of each classification that are NIOSH-recommended or meet the requirements of OSHAs Respiratory Protection Standardexternal icon.
A qualitative fit test is a pass/fail test to assess the adequacy of respirator fit that relies on the individuals sensory detection of a test agent.
A quantitative fit test numerically measures the effectiveness of the respirator to seal with the wearers face, without relying on the wearers voluntary or involuntary response to a test agent.
Quantitative fit tests involve adaptation of the respirator to the fit testing equipment, which can involve making holes in the respirator.
Many healthcare systems already use qualitative fit test methods for fit testing HCP.
For those using quantitative fit test methods, considerations can be made to use qualitative fit test methods to minimize the destruction of an N95 respirator used in fit testing and allow for the re-use of the same N95 respirator by the HCP.
In March 2020, OSHA recommendedexternal icon healthcare employers consider changing from a quantitative fit testing method to a qualitative fit testing method.
Qualitative fit methods may also allow for rapid fit testing of larger numbers of HCP.
Any switch in methods should be assessed to ensure proficiency of the fit testers in carrying out the test.
While engineering and administrative controls should be considered first when selecting controls, the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) should also be part of a suite of strategies used to protect personnel.
Proper use of respiratory protection by HCP requires a comprehensive program (including medical clearance, training, and fit testing) that complies with OSHAs Respiratory Protection Standardexternal icon and a high level of HCP involvement and commitment.
The program should also include provisions for the cleaning, disinfecting, inspection, repair, and storage of respirators used by HCP on the job according to manufacturers instructions.
Proper storage conditions can maximize shelf life of respirators.
The following strategies in this section are traditionally used by some healthcare systems.
If not already implemented, these strategies can be considered by healthcare settings in the face of a potential N95 respirator shortage before implementing the contingency strategies that are listed further below.
N95 respirators include standard and surgical N95 respirators.
In the United States, all N95 respirators used in occupational settings are approved by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and used in accordance with OSHA standards.
A surgical N95 respirator is a NIOSH-approved N95 respirator that has also been cleared by the FDA as a surgical mask.
Surgical N95 respirators (sometimes called medical respirators) are recommended only for use by HCP who need protection from both airborne and fluid hazards, such as  splashes or sprays.
In times of shortage, only HCP who are working in a sterile field or who may be exposed to high-velocity splashes, sprays, or splatters of blood or body fluids should be provided these respirators.
Other HCP can use standard N95 respirators.
If surgical N95 respirators are not available, and there is a risk that the worker may be exposed to high velocity splashes, sprays, or splatters of blood or body fluids, then a faceshield should be worn over the standard N95 respirator.
Use NIOSH approved alternatives to N95 respiratorspdf icon where feasible.
These include other classes of filtering facepiece respirators, elastomeric half-mask and full facepiece air purifying respirators, powered air purifying respirators (PAPRs).
All of these alternatives will provide equivalent or higher protection than N95 respirators when properly worn.
NIOSH maintains a searchable, online version of the certified equipment list identifying all NIOSH-approved respirators.
Every other NIOSH approved filtering facepiece respirators is at least as protective as the N95.
These include N99, N100, P95, P99, P100, R95, R99, and R100.
Many filtering facepiece respirators have exhalation valves and should not be used in surgical settings as unfiltered exhaled breath would compromise the sterile field.
On March 2, 2020, FDA issued an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA)external icon authorizing the use of certain NIOSH-approved respirator models in healthcare settings.
Elastomeric respirators are half-facepiece, tight-fitting respirators that are made of synthetic or rubber material permitting them to be repeatedly disinfected, cleaned, and reused.
They are equipped with replaceable filter cartridges.
Similar to N95 respirators, elastomeric respirators require annual fit testing.
Elastomeric respirators should not be used in surgical settings due to concerns that air coming out of the exhalation valve may contaminate the sterile field.
PAPRs are reusable respirators that are typically loose-fitting hoods or helmets.
These respirators are battery-powered with blower that pulls air through attached filters or cartridges.
The filter is typically a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter.
Loose-fitting PAPRs do not require fit-testing and can be worn by people with facial hair.
However, PAPRs should not be used in surgical settings due to concerns that the blower exhaust and exhaled air may contaminate the sterile field.
On March 28, 2020, FDA issued an update to address NIOSH-Approved Air Purifying Respirators for Use in Health Care Settings During Response to the COVID-19 Public Health Emergencyexternal icon.
Facilities using elastomeric respirators and PAPRs should have up-to-date cleaning/disinfection procedures, which are an essential part of use for protection against infectious agents.
Decisions to implement contingency are based upon these assumptions:
Currently, CDC recommends discharge of patients with confirmed COVID-19 when they are medically stable and have an appropriate home environment to which to return.
CDC lists considerations for care at home in: Interim Guidance for Implementing Home Care of People Not Requiring Hospitalization for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
If patients cannot be discharged to home for social rather than medical reasons, public health officials might need to identify alternative non-hospital housing where those patients can convalesce.
Facilities can consider temporarily suspending annual fit testing of HCP in times of expected shortages.
In March 2020, OSHA issued new temporary guidanceexternal icon regarding the enforcement of OSHAs Respiratory Protection Standard.
The guidance gave OSHA field offices enforcement discretion concerning the annual fit testing requirement as long as HCP have undergone an initial fit test with the same model, style, and size.
Other conditions include explaining to HCP the importance of conducting a user seal check each time the respirator is put on and conducting a fit test if there are visual changes to the employees physical condition.
In times of shortage, consideration can be made to use N95 respirators beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life.
However, expired respirators might not perform to the requirements for which they were certified.
Over time, components such as the strap and material may degrade, which can affect the quality of the fit and seal.
Because of this, use of expired respirators could be prioritized for situations where HCP are NOT exposed to pathogens, such as training and fit testing.
As expired respirators can still serve an important purpose, healthcare facilities should retain and reserve all N95 respirators during the pandemic.
Practices allowing extended use of N95 respirators, when acceptable, can also be considered.
The decision to implement policies that permit extended use of N95 respirators should be made by the professionals who manage the institutions respiratory protection program, in consultation with their occupational health and infection control departments with input from the state/local public health departments.
CDC has recommended guidance on implementation of extended use of N95 respirators in healthcare settings.
Extended use has been recommended and widely used as an option for conserving respirators during previous respiratory pathogen outbreaks and pandemics.
Extended use refers to the practice of wearing the same N95 respirator for repeated close contact encounters with several different patients, without removing the respirator between patient encounters.
Extended use is well suited to situations wherein multiple patients with the same infectious disease diagnosis, whose care requires use of a respirator, are cohorted (e.g housed on the same hospital unit).
It can also be considered to be used for care of patients with tuberculosis, varicella, and measles, other infectious diseases where use of an N95 respirator or higher is recommended.
When practicing extended use of N95 respirators, the maximum recommended extended use period is 8–12 hours.
Respirators should not be worn for multiple work shifts and should not be reused after extended use.
N95 respirators should be removed (doffed) and discarded before activities such as meals and restroom breaks.
Decisions to implement crisis strategies are based upon these assumptions:
Consideration can be made to use N95 respirators beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life for care of patients with COVID-19, tuberculosis, measles, and varicella.
However, respirators beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life may not perform to the requirements for which they were certified.
Over time, components such as the straps and nose bridge material may degrade, which can affect the quality of the fit and seal.
Many models found in U.S. stockpiles and stockpiles of healthcare facilities have been found to continue to perform in accordance with NIOSH performance standards.
However, fluid resistance and flammability were not assessed.
Use of the N95 respirators recommended in Release of Stockpiled N95 Filtering Facepiece Respirators Beyond the Manufacturer-Designated Shelf Life: Considerations for the COVID-19 Response can be considered.
It is optimal to use these respirators in the context of a respiratory protection program that includes medical evaluation, training, and fit testing.
If used in healthcare delivery, it is particularly important that HCP perform the expected seal check, prior to entering a patient care area.
CDC does not recommend using N95s beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life in surgical settings.
On March 2, 2020, FDA issued an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) authorizing the use of certain NIOSH-approved respirator models in healthcare settings.
This EUA includes respirator units that are past their designated shelf life.
Other countries approve respirators for occupational use according to country-specific standards.
These products are evaluated using some methods that are similar to those used by NIOSH.
Some methods are different but are expected to provide protection similar to NIOSH-approved filtering facepiece and elastomeric respirators.
Devices supplied by current NIOSH-approval holders producing respirators under the standards authorized in the listed countries are expected to provide the protection indicated, given that a proper fit is achieved.
Therefore, they are considered to be suitable alternatives to provide protection during the COVID-19 response when supplies are short.
Within the following tables, the country, conformity assessment standards, standards and guidance documents, acceptable product classification, and NIOSH classification are provided in alphabetical order.
All of these respirators have protection factors of at least 10 in the countries listed below, as outlined in the standards and guidance documents specified.
Non-NIOSH approved products developed by manufacturers who are not NIOSH approval holders are expected to meet the performance requirements if they have been issued a certificate of approval by an authorized test laboratory indicating they conform to the standards below.
Non-NIOSH-approved products developed by manufacturers who are not NIOSH approval holders, including only products approved by and received from China, should only be used in crisis situations when no other NIOSH-approved N95 respirator (or a listed device from one of the other countries identified within the FDA EAU) is available; they should not be used during aerosol generating medical procedures unless the alternative is a loose-fitting surgical mask or improvised device.
On April 3, 2020, FDA issued an update to the Non-NIOSH Approved Respirator Emergency Use Authorization (EUA)external icon concerning non-NIOSH-approved respirators that have been approved in other countries.
Show More
Re-use refers to the practice of using the same N95 respirator by one HCP for multiple encounters with different patients but removing it (i.e.
doffing) after each encounter.
This practice is often referred to as limited reuse because restrictions are in place to limit the number of times the same respirator is reused.
It is important to consult with the respirator manufacturer regarding the maximum number of donnings or uses they recommend for the N95 respirator model.
If no manufacturer guidance is available, data suggest limiting the number of reuses to no more than five uses per device to ensure an adequate safety margin.1 N95 and other disposable respirators should not be shared by multiple HCP.
CDC has recommended guidance on implementation of limited re-use of N95 respirators in healthcare settings.
For pathogens for which contact transmission is not a concern, routine limited reuse of single-use disposable respirators has been practiced for decades.
For example, for tuberculosis prevention, a respirator classified as disposable can be reused by the same provider as long as the respirator maintains its structural and functional integrity.
If reuse must be implemented in times of shortages, HCP could be encouraged to reuse their N95 respirators when caring for patients with tuberculosis disease first.
Limited re-use of N95 respirators when caring for patients with COVID-19 might also become necessary.
However, it is unknown what the potential contribution of contact transmission is for SARS-CoV-2, and caution should be used.
Re-use should be implemented according to CDC guidance.
Re-use has been recommended as an option for conserving respirators during previous respiratory pathogen outbreaks and pandemics.
It may also be necessary to re-use N95 respirators when caring for patients with varicella or measles, although contact transmission poses a risk to HCP who implement this practice.
Ideally, N95 respirators should not be re-used by HCP who care for patients with COVID-19 then care for other patients with varicella, measles, and tuberculosis, and vice versa.
Respirators grossly contaminated with blood, respiratory or nasal secretions, or other bodily fluids from patients should be discarded.
HCP can consider using a face shield or facemask over the respirator to reduce/prevent contamination of the N95 respirator.
HCP re-using an N95 respirators should use a clean pair of gloves when donning or adjusting a previously worn N95 respirator.
It is important to discard gloves and perform hand hygiene after the N95 respirator is donned or adjusted.
The surfaces of a properly donned and functioning NIOSH-approved N95 respirator will become contaminated with pathogens while filtering the inhalation air of the wearer during exposures to pathogen laden aerosols.
The pathogens on the filter materials of the respirator may be transferred to the wearer upon contact with the respirator during activities such as adjusting the respirator, improper doffing of the respirator, or when performing a user-seal check when redonnng a previously worn respirator.
One effective strategy to mitigate the contact transfer of pathogens from the respirator to the wearer could be to issue each HCP who may be exposed to COVID-19 patients a minimum of five respirators.
Each respirator will be used on a particular day and stored in a breathable paper bag until the next week.
This will result in each worker requiring a minimum of five N95 respirators if they put on, take off, care for them, and store them properly each day.
This amount of time in between uses should exceed the 72 hour expected survival time for SARS-CoV2 (the virus that caused COVID-19).3 HCP should still treat the respirator as though it is still contaminated and follow the precautions outlined in CDCs re-use recommendations.
Respirator manufacturers may provide guidance for respirator decontamination.
At present, there are no generally approved methods for N95 and other disposable respirator decontamination prior to re-use.
Additional guidance on potential methods may be found here.
Use of additional N95 respirators beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life for care of patients with COVID-19, tuberculosis, measles, and varicella can be considered.
However, respirators beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life may not perform to the requirements for which they were certified.
Over time, components such as the straps and nose bridge material may degrade, which can affect the quality of the fit and seal.
Some models have been found NOT to perform in accordance with NIOSH performances standards, and consideration may be given to use these respirators as identified in Release of Stockpiled N95 Filtering Facepiece Respirators Beyond the Manufacturer-Designated Shelf Life: Considerations for the COVID-19 Response.
In addition, consideration can be given to use N95 respirators that have not been evaluated by NIOSH beyond the manufacturer-designated shelf life.
These respirators should ideally be used in the context of a respiratory protection program that includes medical evaluation, training, and fit testing.
It is particularly important that HCP perform the expected seal check, prior to entering a patient care area.
The number of infectious particles required to cause an infection (infectious dose) is often uncertain or unknown for respiratory pathogens.
Further, there is often uncertainty about the influence of factors such as exposure duration and nature of clinical symptoms on the likelihood of infection transmission from person-to-person.
When facemasks must be used by HCP entering a patient care area, source control (i.e.
masking of symptomatic patients) and maintaining distance from the patient are particularly important to reduce the risk of transmission.
This prioritization approach to conservation is intended to be used when N95 respirators are so limited that routinely practiced standards of care for all HCP wearing N95 respirators when caring for a COVID-19 patient are no longer possible.
N95 respirators beyond their manufacture-designated shelf life, when available, are preferable to use of facemasks.
The use of N95s or elastomeric respirators or PAPRs should be prioritized for HCP with the highest potential exposures including being present in the room during aerosol generating procedures performed on symptomatic persons.
However, HCP should consider not entering the patient care area.
However, HCP should consider not entering the patient care area.
During severe resource limitations, consider excluding HCP who may be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, such as those of older age, those with chronic medical conditions, or those who may be pregnant, from caring for patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 infection.
It may be possible to designate HCP who have clinically recovered from COVID-19 to preferentially provide care for additional patients with COVID-19.
Individuals who have recovered from COVID-19 infection may have developed some protective immunity, but this has not yet been proven.
Portable fan devices with high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration that are carefully placed can increase the effective air changes per hour of clean air to the patient room, reducing risk to individuals entering the room without respiratory protection.
NIOSH has developed guidance for using portable HEPA filtration systems to create expedient patient isolation rooms.
The expedient patient isolation room approach involves establishing a high-ventilation-rate, negative pressure, inner isolation zone that sits within a clean larger ventilated zone.
In the absence of any remaining supply of N95 respirators, it may be possible to use this technology in conjunction with HCP wearing facemasks.
NIOSH has developed the ventilated headboard that draws exhaled air from a patient in bed into a HEPA filter, decreasing risk of HCP exposure to patient-generated aerosol.
This technology consists of lightweight, sturdy, and adjustable aluminum framing with a retractable plastic canopy.
The ventilated headboard can be deployed in combination with HEPA fan/filter units to provide surge isolation capacity within a variety of environments, from traditional patient rooms to triage stations, and emergency medical shelters.
In the absence of any remaining supply of N95 respirators, it may be possible to use this technology in conjunction with HCP and/or patients wearing facemasks.
Who this guidance is for: use by federal, state, and local public health officials, respiratory protection program managers, occupational health service leaders, infection prevention and control program leaders, and other leaders in healthcare settings who are responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing pathogen transmission in healthcare settings.
Purpose: This webpage describes considerations for the use of powered air-purifying respirators (PAPRs) to provide respiratory protection to healthcare practitioners (HCP) as a component of a formally developed and implemented written respiratory protection program.
It addresses conventional, contingency, and crisis surge PAPR use and maintenance practices.
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the transmission and severity of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
Please check the CDC COVID-19 website periodically for updated interim guidance.
Conventional capacity strategies should be incorporated into everyday practices.
Contingency capacity strategies should be used when shortages are predicted but supplies are available.
Crisis capacity strategies should be used during known shortages.
NIOSH-approved respirators are available in many types, models, and sizes from many manufacturers for a wide variety of uses in many occupational settings.
The most common types of respirators in healthcare are N95 filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs), surgical N95 FFRs, and PAPRs.
Of these three options, many healthcare practitioners are the least familiar with PAPRs.
A PAPR is an air-purifying respirator that uses a blower to force air through filter cartridges or canisters and into the breathing zone of the wearer.
This process creates an air flow inside either a tight-fitting facepiece or loose-fitting hood or helmet, providing a higher assigned protection factor (APF) than the reusable elastomeric non-powered air-purifying half facepiece (half mask) or N95 FFRs.
A PAPR can be used for protection during healthcare procedures in which HCP are exposed to greater risks of aerosolized pathogens causing acute respiratory infections.
A PAPR may have a tight-fitting half or full facepiece or a loose-fitting facepiece, hood, or helmet.
It has an OSHA APF of at least 25 for loose-fitting hoods and helmets, 50 for tight-fitting half masks, and 1,000 for full facepiece types and some loose-fitting hoods and helmets where the manufacturers testing has demonstrated an APF of 1,000.
CDC has published recommendations for HCP respiratory protection and of commonly used NIOSH-approved, FDA-cleared, single-use filtering facepiece N95 surgical respirators.1 Properly fitted FFR and half facepiece reusable elastomeric respirators are expected to reduce exposures to one-tenth of the concentration that is in the air, based on OSHAs APF of 10 for these respirator types.
All PAPR APFs exceed the APF of 10 for N95 FFR or elastomeric half facepiece respirators.2
PAPRs reduce the aerosol concentration inhaled by the wearer to at least 1/25th of that in the air, compared to a 1/10th reduction for FFRs and elastomeric half facepiece air-purifying respirators.
OSHA assigns an APF of 1,000 to some PAPRs with hoods or helmets.
However, employers must have evidence provided by the respirator manufacturer that testing of these respirators demonstrates performance at a level of protection of 1,000 to receive an APF of 1,000.
Absent such evidence, PAPRs with loose-fitting helmets or hoods have an APF of 25.
When used properly, PAPRs provide increased protection and decrease the likelihood of infection transmission to the wearer as compared to FFRs and half face reusable elastomeric respirators.
A variety of NIOSH-approved PAPR designs are available.
Examples include those with tight-fitting facepieces and loose-fitting hoods or helmets, blower styles, battery types (e.g Lithium ion, Nickel-Metal hydride, Nickel Cadmium) or over-the-counter disposable batteries, and high efficiency (HE) filters or filter cartridges.
HE filters are 99.97% efficient against 0.3 micron particles.
A PAPR may have adjustable air flow rates for added comfort and a range of cartridge protections some of which are soley for particulates (HE filters) and others which also protect against chemical gases and vapors that can be used to help protect against hazards associated with the handling of certain hazardous drugs and cleaning/disinfecting operations.
The substantial PAPR product diversity provides flexibility to customize protection needed in a healthcare setting.
Loose-fitting NIOSH-approved PAPRs have several advantages over tight-fitting non-powered approved air-purifying respirators, including3:
The facility should assess the limitations and factors associated with using PAPRs when considering their use in healthcare settings, including:
NOTE: PAPR HE filters used in industry are generally re-used until they are soiled, damaged, or reduce PAPR air flow below specified levels.
Caution should be used when using the filter for a live virus, and a practical replacement cycle should be implemented until more is known.
When respirators, including PAPRs, are used to reduce inhalation exposures, OSHA requires a written respiratory protection program in compliance with OSHA 29CFR1910.134, and the respirators must be NIOSH-approved.4 To be considered NIOSH-approved, the PAPR assembly cannot be modified from its approved configuration, and only those replacement parts specified and provided by the manufacturer must be used.
The manufacturers PAPR instructions are specific to a respirator models materials and specifications.
Instructions are generally provided with the PAPR facepiece, blower, and battery packaging.
All instructions must be carefully followed.
OSHA also permits employers to use the cleaning recommendations provided by the manufacturer of the respirator, provided such procedures are as effective as those listed in Appendix B- 2, meaning that the respirator is properly cleaned and disinfected in a manner that prevents damage to the respirator and does not cause harm (e.g skin irritation) to the user.5
PAPRs may be used in healthcare for a variety of applications.
Because they provide higher APFs than N95 FFRs and reusable elastomeric half facepiece respirators, PAPRs are suitable for use when aerosol-generating procedures are performed, by hospital first receivers, or when the respirator user is not able to wear a tight-fitting respirator.
For effective use, PAPR manufacturer instructions must be followed.
The components of NIOSH-approved PAPRs vary considerably among manufacturers, and they react differently to cleaning and disinfection solutions and procedures.
Manufacturers cleaning and disinfection solutions and procedures also vary.
These important maintenance activities can cause damage or deteriorate PAPR facepieces, headgear components (hoods, helmets), breathing tubes (hoses), and batteries.
If cleaning and disinfection solutions and procedures are ineffective, HCP may be at risk of contact transmission.
For these reasons, manufacturers generally recommend that the filter component be discarded.
Some employers may be able to follow manufacturer-specific instructions for conventional use, but the cost of doing so may make PAPRs a less desirable solution to achieve the necessary protection.
PAPR use requires a robust maintenance program for repairing or replacing components that have become damaged during use, or during cleaning and disinfection and battery management procedures.6 Competent, trained staff are required to support the PAPR maintenance program.
Manufacturers recommend cleaning and disinfection procedures for PAPR components except for the HE filter/cartridge, which they generally recommend be discarded and replaced.
Filter cartridges can be reused until they become so clogged that they reduce airflow or become visibly soiled or damaged.
Clogging is not expected to be a factor in non-dusty environments such as healthcare settings.
The outside of the filter cartridge can have surface cleaning and decontamination while the rest of the unit is being serviced.
Viruses and bacteria causing acute respiratory infections can survive on respirator components for variable periods of time, from hours to weeks.
Consequently, contaminated respirators must be handled, cleaned, and disinfected properly to reduce the possibility of the device serving as a fomite and contributing to disease transmission.7 According to OSHA, the employer may use other commercially available cleansers of equivalent disinfection quality if their use is recommended or approved by the respirator manufacturer.
Conventional use requires cleaning and disinfecting using either the procedures in OSHAs Respiratory Protection Standard or the procedures recommended by the respirator manufacturer, provided they are at least as effective as OSHAs.8 If an alternate procedure is used to clean and disinfect the PAPR and its components, it must be recommended or approved by the manufacturer.
In general, cleaning and disinfecting consists of dissembling the PAPR, cleaning and disinfecting components, thoroughly rinsing components, and reassembling the PAPR when components are dry.
It is important to follow all steps set forth in the manufacturers instructions.
Cleaning is recommended after each use, but the PAPR must be cleaned as often as necessary to prevent them from becoming unsanitary.
As with reusable elastomeric respirators, manufacturers generally recommend PAPR HE filters and filter cartridges are not to be cleaned or disinfected.
Unlike reusable elastomeric respirators, PAPRs use only HE filters.
These filters can differ in their appearance and their attachment on, or fit into, the blower assembly.
Routine maintenance is also required for battery charging, and/or replacement.
The maintenance program for PAPRs requires a supply of replacement components, including HE filters/cartridges to support and maintain PAPR use.
CDC has provided thorough information on disinfecting equipment and surfaces potentially contaminated by coronaviruses.9 Specific instructions for cleaning and disinfecting PAPRs are not addressed.
Some disinfectants are powerful germicides, and their use requires special precautions such as adequate ventilation, use of clean non-sterile gloves, gowns, or face shields.
Care must be taken during cleaning and disinfection to ensure the cleaning staff does not self-infect or injure themselves performing this work.
Cleaning and disinfection must be done by competent trained individuals.
Centralizing this activity can ensure it is properly done.
Because of necessity, PAPR components including filters may be treated differently for their cleaning and disinfection.
Whereas conventional practice is to discard the filters after each use, contingency or crisis practices may necessitate cleaning and disinfecting the filter.
The performance of some filter media can be degraded by contact with the disinfectant.
The effectiveness of an alternate filter cartridge disinfection solution and procedure may be uncertain:
Some PAPRs have  filter cartridges or blower assemblies that prevent disinfectant contact with the filter media.
If available, these PAPRs should be used in the contingency or crisis capacity strategy approaches.
These PAPR designs provide added assurance that the filter media will not be contacted with the cleaning and disinfection solutions.
These filter cartridges, as well as PAPR blowers may be wiped down repeatedly.
NOTE: PAPR HE filters used in industry are generally re-used until they are soiled, damaged, or reduce PAPR air flow below specified levels.
Caution should be used when using the filter for a live virus, and a practical replacement cycle should be implemented until more is known.
Practices not approved by the manufacturer can increase the risk and uncertainty of re-using damaged or degraded components.
This must be balanced against other available HCP protection options to sustain effective HCP protection and patient care.
Alternate procedures used during emergencies should be assessed and documented in the written RPP, including alternate cleaning and disinfection practices.
For disinfection, diluted household bleach solutions, alcohol solutions with at least 70% ethyl alcohol, and EPA-registered household disinfectants for use against coronaviruses are effective.
For use of diluted household bleach solutions, follow disinfectant manufacturers instructions for proper disinfectant application, PPE, and ventilation.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claims external iconare expected to be effective against SARS-CoV-2.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Disinfectants listed on the EPAs Registered Antimicrobial Products for Use Against Novel Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, could be used to inactivate the virus.10 Those intended for use with soft surfaces may be preferred.
CAUTION: The following may degrade or damage the respirator components.
The following is a general step-by-step process for cleaning and disinfecting PAPR components.
PAPR manufacturers may not authorize these steps; however, during crisis operations when conventional procedures are not feasible, these steps could extend the supply of PAPR components.
If alternate cleaning or disinfection instructions are authorized, it is important to follow the facilitys established infection control practices for cleaning organic and inorganic materials and infectious organisms including the virus that causes coronavirus disease 2019.
Healthcare practitioners should always wear the required proper personal protective equipment (PPE) during cleaning and disinfecting respirator components.
These workers should always follow the disinfecting agent manufacturers user instructions regarding usability, application, dilution ratio and contact time, and ensure all components are thoroughly rinsed with clean, warm water and thoroughly dried before use or storage.
In addition, PAPR facepieces or headgear worn by more than one user must be cleaned and disinfected before being worn by a different user in shared situations.
There are several basic steps to clean and disinfect PAPR components – dissemble, clean, disinfect, rinse and dry, inspect, repair or replace, and store.
The order and details of each step are important.
PAPR components can be stored and reassembled, or reassembly can be done before use.
PAPR components may become damaged or deteriorated with prolonged or extended use of disinfecting products.
Competent, trained staff must inspect the components of their PAPR following each disinfection and prior to re-use of components.
Additionally, the user should always inspect the components of their PAPR prior to each use and report any damaged components.
Damaged components should be repaired or replaced according to user instructions.
Alternate cleaning and disinfection procedures have been studied and found to be generally effective for use during a pandemic.12 13 Procedures were used to clean and disinfect components inoculated with H1N1 influenza A/PR/8/34 (ATCC VR-1469).
While these methods have been demonstrated to be effective at disinfecting PAPRs, caution should be used as some manufacturers have reported that PDI™ AF3 Saniwipes can damage some PAPR components.
The chemicals in them cause crazing (a rapid and sever embrittlement of plastics).
Chemical compatibility for PAPR components is not well understood.
These compounds are referred to as quaternary ammonium compounds, which PAPR manufacturers strongly recommend should be avoided.
These disinfectants have been shown to be incompatible with some materials and do not have proven efficacy against all microorganisms.11
If following these procedures and applying them to filter cartridges during periods when supplies are limited or not available, extreme care must be taken to prevent cleaning and disinfectant contact with the filter media.
External surfaces of filters cartridges should be carefully wiped, not dipped, soaked, or submerged when applying the cleaning and disinfectant solutions.
Practices not approved by the manufacturer can increase the risk and uncertainty of re-using damaged or degraded components.
This must be balanced against other available HCP protection options to sustain effective HCP protection and patient care when supplies are limited or not available.
Modified procedures used during emergencies, including alternate cleaning and disinfection practices, should be documented and evaluated frequently throughout the crisis operation.
1 CDC 2020.
Strategies for optimizing the supply of N95 respirators.
2 OSHA 2009.
Assigned Protection Factors: for the Revised Respiratory Protection Standard.
Available from:  https://www.osha.gov/Publications/3352-APF-respirators.htmlexternal icon
3 3M 2018.
Using PAPRS in Clinical and Healthcare Settings.
Available from:  https://workersafety.3m.com/using-paprs-clinical-healthcare-settings/external icon
4 OSHA 29CFR1910.134.
Available from: https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910/1910.134external icon
5 OSHA 1910.134 App B-2 Respirator Cleaning Procedures (Mandatory).
Available from: https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910/1910.134AppB2external icon
6 NIOSH 2013.
Getting Optimal Performance from a Powered Air-purifying Respirator (PAPR) Depends on the Condition of its Battery!
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, DHHS (NIOSH) Publication 2013-146, https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2013-146/pdfs/2013-146.pdfpdf icon
7 WHO 2014.
Infection Prevention and Control of Epidemic-and Pandemic Prone Acute Respiratory Infections in Health Care.
Available from: https://www.who.int/csr/bioriskreduction/infection_control/publication/en/external icon
8 OSHA 2012.
Transcript for the OSHA training video entitled Maintenance &amp; Care of Respirators.
Available from: https://www.osha.gov/video/respiratory_protection/maintenance_transcript.htmlexternal icon
9 CDC 2019.
Guidelines for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities, 2008.
Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/infectioncontrol/pdf/guidelines/disinfection-guidelines-H.pdfpdf icon
10 EPA 2020.
List N: disinfectants for use against SARS-CoV-2.
Available from: https://www.epa.gov/pe0sticide-registration/list-n-disinfectants-use-against-sars-cov-2external icon
11 Rutala WA, Weber DJ 2019.
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee.
Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities, 2008.
12 Lawrence C, Harnish DA, Sandoval-Powers M, Mills D, Bergman M, Heimbuch BK 2017.
Assessment of half-mask elastomeric respirator and powered air-purifying respirator reprocessing for an influenza pandemic.
Am J Infect Control, 45(12):1324-1330.
13 Applied Research Associates, Inc. 2019.
Research to Mitigate a Shortage of Respiratory Protection Devices During Public Health Emergencies.
Contract # HHSF22321400158C.
Available from: https://www.ara.com/sites/default/files/MitigateShortageofRespiratoryProtectionDevices.pdfpdf iconexternal icon
Conventional, Contingency, and Crisis Strategies
Who this guidance is for: Federal, state, and local public health officials, respiratory protection program managers, occupational health service leaders, infection prevention and control program leaders, and other leaders in healthcare settings who are responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing pathogen transmission in healthcare settings.
Purpose: This webpage offers guidance for the use of reusable elastomeric particulate respirators to provide respiratory protection to healthcare practitioners (HCP) against pathogens as a component of a formally developed and implemented written respiratory protection program.
This guidance is based on what is currently known about the transmission and severity of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
Please check the CDC COVID-19 website periodically for updated guidance.
Conventional guidance is not applicable during the COVID-19 response when supplies are short.
HCP should follow the contingency and crisis strategies.
Elastomeric respirators, such as half facepiece or full facepiece tight-fitting respirators where the facepieces are made of synthetic or natural rubber material, can be repeatedly used, cleaned, disinfected, stored, and re-used.
They are available as alternatives to disposable half mask filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs), such as N95 FFRs, for augmenting the total supply of respirators available for use by HCP.
While elastomeric respirators are not cleared by FDA for fluid resistance, based on their NIOSH approval, they can provide at least equivalent protection to N95 FFRs.
Some types of elastomeric respirators can offer higher assigned protection factors (APFs) than N95 FFRs.
They are equipped with replaceable filter cartridges or flexible, disc or pancake-style filters, which are not housed in a cartridge body.
All elastomeric respirators equipped with the proper air-purification filters, cartridges, or canisters would also have utility in this application.
Elastomerics may also have sealing surfaces and adjustable straps that accommodate a better fit.
Because they can be re-used, elastomeric particulate respirators provide an alternative respiratory protection option to FFRs for protection against pathogens.
While this document focuses on respiratory protection for exposure to pathogens, these respirators may also serve as protection against other airborne hazards in healthcare settings.
However, they require maintenance and a supply of replaceable components including straps, inhalation and exhalation valves, valve covers, and filters, cartridges, or canisters.
This webinar provides an overview of respiratory protection and guidance surrounding supply shortages.
This webinar also provides information on infection prevention measures, strategies for optimizing the supply of N95 respirators, and a broad overview of the use of elastomeric respirators in healthcare.
Guidance on elastomeric respirators is currently in development.
Elastomeric respirators have the same basic requirements for an OSHA-approved respiratory protection program as filtering facepiece respirators, including medical evaluation, training, and fit testing.
However, they have additional maintenance requirements which also include cleaning and disinfection of the facepiece components such as straps, valves, and valve covers.
While it is often possible to decontaminate the hard outer casing of filters, the filter material itself typically cannot be cleaned or disinfected for reuse.
Instead, filter components should be discarded when they become damaged, soiled, or clogged.
There are several types of elastomeric respirators, half-facepiece or half mask (APF = 10)1 and full facepiece (APF = 50).
The specific cautions, limitations, and restrictions of use should be understood when determining whether to use these respirators in healthcare facilities.
Respirators with full facepieces have the same filter considerations but provide greater protection because of better sealing characteristics and less face seal leakage and also provide protection to more of the face and very importantly, the eyes.
Elastomeric respirators with exhalation valves should not be used in surgical settings due to concerns that unfiltered air coming out of the exhalation valve may contaminate the surgical field.
When respirators are used to protect against hazardous airborne exposures in the workplace, OSHA requires employers to develop and implement a written respiratory protection program that conforms to OSHA 29CFR1910.134 including initial and annual fit testing.1 The use of a NIOSH-approved respirator is required by OSHA.
OSHA also requires that respirators be used in conformance with the conditions of their NIOSH certification.
Hence, a NIOSH-approved respirator assembly cannot be modified, and only those replacement parts specified and provided by the manufacturer must be used.
The manufacturers instructions are specific to its respirator materials and specifications.
Manufacturer instructions are generally provided with the respirator facepiece packaging.
Appendix B-2 to OSHAs Respiratory Protection standard (29CFR1910.134external icon) provides general procedures for employers to use when cleaning respirators.
OSHA also permits employers to use the cleaning recommendations provided by the respirator manufacturer, if such procedures are as effective as those listed in Appendix B- 2, meaning that the respirator is properly cleaned and disinfected in a manner that prevents damage to the respirator and does not cause harm such as skin irritation to the user.
Generally, it is recommended that respirators be cleaned and disinfected immediately after doffing (i.e removing).
To avoid contact transmission, precautions should be taken during doffing and use.
Training on appropriate donning and doffing procedures should be provided to all employees expected to wear respirators.
Both CDC and OSHA have videos illustrating proper donning and doffing of the respirator.16 Elastomeric components vary among manufacturers and react differently to cleaning and disinfection solutions and procedures.
The respirator facepiece components such as facepiece, valves, and straps require maintenance including cleaning, disinfection and inspection prior to reuse.
OSHA only requires replacing filters where necessary, for example, when soiled, contaminated, or clogged.
Viruses and bacteria that cause acute respiratory infections can survive on respirator components for variable periods of time, from hours to weeks.
Consequently, contaminated respirators must be handled, cleaned, and disinfected carefully and properly to reduce the possibility of the device carrying infection and contributing to disease transmission.2 Manufacturers recommend cleaning and disinfection procedures for their elastomeric respirator components such as facepiece, valve covers, valves, and straps.
The materials that comprise the elastomeric components of NIOSH-approved respirators vary among manufacturers; consequently, cleaning and disinfection solutions and procedures recommended by manufacturers may also vary.
Manufacturers typically recommend that filter cartridges be discarded after each use when cleaning an elastomeric respirator.
Following manufacturer recommendations may be possible for some employers, but others may find discarding the filter component with each cleaning of an elastomeric respirator to be a cost factor when selecting between FFRs and elastomeric respirators, but especially in times of shortage, users may find it difficult to replace the filter cartridges due to supply difficulties.
OSHA only requires replacing filters where necessary, for example, when soiled, contaminated, or clogged.
Additionally, cleaning and disinfecting respirators can damage or deteriorate respirator facepiece component materials and adversely affect their performance when re-using after disinfection.
Three types or series of filters are available for use with reusable elastomeric respirators.
Filters are classified by their resistance to degradation by oil-based aerosols.
Manufacturers provide use-time limitations and other limitations or restrictions depending on the respirators intended use.
If the healthcare setting does not have any oil-based aerosols present, any filter series can be used.
Filters are available in three efficiency levels – 95, 99, 100.
Thus, a wide selection is potentially available for use to augment the overall supply of respirators in healthcare settings.
The half mask or facepiece type respirator with N-Series 95% efficiency level filters (N-95) has been determined to provide adequate protection in combination with other healthcare practice interventions such as hand washing, isolation, and spatial distance for the risks associated with the transmission of tuberculosis, influenza, and novel coronaviruses.3 4
Generally, in industrial settings, filters are replaced when soiled or contaminated, damaged, and when breathing resistance increases.
However, in healthcare settings breathing resistance will unlikely be a reason for filter replacement since filters should seldom if ever become loaded with heavy concentrations of dust.
Depending on use, one manufacturer recommends the filter be discarded after each use, while another recommends the filter cartridge be disposed no later than 30 days after the first use if no oil mists are present.5 6  The respirators other elastomeric components should not be cleaned with solvents (e.g acetone, ethanol) or exposed to temperatures greater than 50°C (122°F).
Cleaning and disinfection must be done using either the procedures in OSHAs Respiratory Protection Standard or the procedures recommended by the respirator manufacturer, provided they are at least as effective as OSHAs procedures.
The employer must consult with the manufacturer for the proper disinfectants/procedures and their potential impact upon its respirator facepiece components.
If it is determined that the disinfection solution and procedures do not degrade the facepiece components, it is possible the components can be re-used, subject to inspection by a qualified individual to determine whether the components need to be repaired or replaced.
Filter cartridges should be removed from the facepiece prior to cleaning and disinfecting the elastomeric facepiece components.
Generally, the facepiece components are removed from the facepiece to be cleaned and disinfected.
There are several basic steps to clean and disinfect a respirator – remove, clean, disinfect, rinse and dry, inspect and repair or replace, and store.
The order and details of each step are important.
And it is very important that respirators are thoroughly air dried prior to storage.
Some disinfectants are powerful germicides and their use requires special precautions such as adequate ventilation, use of clean non-sterile gloves, gowns, and/or face shields.
Therefore, cleaning and disinfection must be done by competent, trained individuals.
Centralizing this activity might help ensure that it is being properly executed.
Maintenance must be performed only by those individuals who have been trained in the task and are knowledgeable of the models being serviced.
Specially trained individuals (ideally the same people who clean and disinfect respirators) should also be employed to carefully inspect respirators after cleaning with attention to valves and straps.
Inspections should follow the manufacturers recommendations.
Only the original respirator manufacturers component parts should be stocked and available to replace damaged components when necessary.
Who this guidance is for: Those responsible for developing and implementing policies and procedures for preventing pathogen transmission in healthcare settings.
This includes federal, state, and local public health officials, respiratory protection program managers, occupational health service leaders, and infection prevention and control program leaders.
Purpose: This webpage describes options for deploying air-purifying reusable elastomeric particulate respirators to provide respiratory protection to healthcare practitioners (HCP) when supplies of N95 filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs), including surgical N95s, are limited or not available.
Strategies for reusable elastomeric respirator use in healthcare settings in conventional, non-surge demand situations, are discussed in Conventional Strategies.
Conventional use should adhere to OSHA requirements and manufacturer-specific recommended instructions.
Contingency capacity strategies are for emergency situations in which each elastomeric respirator is issued for the exclusive use of an individual employee.
The respirators are cleaned and disinfected as often as necessary to remain unsoiled and sanitary.
Their description and use should be part of a written OSHA respiratory protection program (RPP).
If there is deviation from the standard RPP, it should be authorized and documented by the programs administrator.
Crisis capacity strategies are for emergency use, limited respirator and/or respirator component supplies such as filters, cartridges, or canisters, and valves, and situations in which it is impossible for individual HCP to have a dedicated elastomeric respirator, for example when the same respirator must be used by multiple HCP.
When used by more than one HCP, respirators must be cleaned and disinfected before being worn by different individuals.
The use of elastomeric respirators should be part of a written OSHA RPP.
If there is any deviation from the conventional RPP, it should be authorized and documented by the programs administrator.
NIOSH-certified reusable elastomeric particulate respirators provide at least the same level of protection as N95 FFRs, and some types of elastomeric respirators can offer higher assigned protection factors than N95 FFRs.
The most significant difference between reusable elastomeric respirators and disposable FFRs is that reusable respirators must be maintained and inspected after each use, including cleaning and disinfection of the elastomeric components such as facepiece valves, valve covers, and straps.
When used in conventional workplace conditions, the filter, cartridge, or canister of a reusable elastomeric respirator is not cleaned or disinfected; it is discarded once damaged, soiled, or clogged.
Elastomeric respirators are equipped with replaceable filters.
Some replaceable filters are cartridge style in which the filtration media is housed inside of a cartridge.
Others consist of flexible, disc or pancake-style filters, in which the filter media are not housed within a cartridge body.
This document provides considerations for disinfecting the outside of a filter cartridge during contingency and crisis scenarios to increase the supply of respirators for protection during the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.
However, there is an increased risk of contact transmission or damage to the filter cartridge that must be considered.
Reusable respirators described in this document include tight-fitting half-facepiece or full-facepiece elastomeric respirators that use replaceable filters, cartridges, or canisters and have facepieces made of synthetic or natural rubber material permitting repeated cleaning, disinfection, storage, and reuse.
They contain an exhalation valve and should not be used in surgical settings when there is concern that unfiltered air coming out of the exhalation valve may contaminate the surgical field.
As with N95 FFRs, reusable respirators require an RPP including, but not limited to, initial and annual fit testing, and a user seal check each time the respirator is used.
However, on March 14, 2020 OSHA issued Temporary Enforcement Guidanceexternal icon permitting OSHA field offices to exercise enforcement discretion regarding the annual fit testing requirements until further notice.7
NIOSH-approved, elastomeric respirators provide an alternative respiratory protection option capable of decreasing the total number of respirators required because they may be cleaned, disinfected, and reused numerous times, which should reduce the number of respirators needed when supplies are limited.8 However, a supply of elastomeric respirator facepiece components should be held in reserve to replace damaged or deteriorated parts, and supplies of replacement filters, cartridges, or canisters are also needed.
The filters of these respirators are at least as protective as the N95 FFRs and surgical N95 FFRs typically used in healthcare settings.
They are not cleared by FDA for fluid resistance and require maintenance including cleaning, disinfection, and inspection.
There are several types of filter media for use with NIOSH-approved reusable, half -facepiece elastomeric respirators.
All are sufficient at removing droplet and viral size particles when worn correctly for the duration of the exposure.
Filters are available in three efficiency levels – 95, 99, 100.
Thus, a wide selection is potentially available for use to augment the overall supply of respirators in healthcare settings.
Half-facepiece or half mask (APF = 10)1 and full facepiece (APF = 50) elastomeric respirators have specific cautions, limitations, and restrictions of use that need to be understood when determining whether to use these respirators in a healthcare facility.
Respirators with full facepieces have the same filter considerations but provide greater protection because of better sealing characteristics and less face seal leakage and also provide protection to more of the face and very importantly, the eyes.
During contingency and crisis capacity strategies, when shortages are predicted, but supplies are still available, each elastomeric respirator is issued for the exclusive use of an individual employee.
Elastomeric respirators must be cleaned as often as necessary to remain unsoiled and sanitary.
Viruses and bacteria that cause acute respiratory infections can survive on respirator components for variable periods of time, from hours to weeks.
Consequently, contaminated elastomeric respirators must be handled, cleaned, and disinfected properly to reduce the possibility of the device carrying infectious particles and contributing to disease transmission.2
Each respirator manufacturer identifies the appropriate cleaning procedures, which typically involves 1) using soap and warm water or chemical disinfectants authorized for use with their specific elastomeric facepiece components and 2) discarding the filter cartridge.
For conventional use: Employers must consult with the manufacturer concerning the effectiveness and uncertainties of alternative cleaning and disinfectant solutions and procedures used for reuse of the facepiece, straps, and filter components.
For contingency and crisis use: Because of necessity, elastomeric facepiece components and filter cartridges may be treated differently for their cleaning and disinfection.
Whereas conventional practice is to discard the filter component, contingency practices may necessitate cleaning and disinfecting the filter housing, but care must be taken to not exposed the filter media to any cleaning solutions.
The performance of filter media can be degraded by contact with the disinfectant.
There are several basic steps to clean and disinfect an elastomeric respirator – remove, clean, disinfect, rinse and dry, inspect and repair or replace, and store.
Bessesen et al.
provide useful guidelines for cleaning and disinfecting elastomeric respirators in healthcare environments.10 These methods have been used successfully in several healthcare settings in the United States.
The order and details of each step are important.
If available and appropriate, the respirator facepiece components should be cleaned using OSHA or manufacturer protocols.7 14–15 Filter cartridge components would conventionally be discarded.
However, during periods of surge capacity, a careful wipe of the filter cartridge, avoiding contact with the filter media, and using a common hospital disinfectant wipe has low risk of damaging the filter.
The filter cartridge should never be dipped or submerged in disinfectant or excessively wetted with disinfectant.
Generally, it is recommended that respirators be cleaned and disinfected immediately after doffing (i.e removing).
To avoid contact transmission, precautions should be taken during doffing and use.
Training on appropriate donning and doffing procedures should be provided to all employees expected to wear respirators.
Both CDC and OSHA have videos illustrating proper donning and doffing of the respirator.16 Elastomeric components vary among manufacturers and react differently to cleaning and disinfection solutions and procedures.
The respirator facepiece components such as facepiece, valves, and straps require maintenance including cleaning, disinfection and inspection prior to reuse.
OSHA only requires replacing filters where necessary, for example, when soiled, contaminated, or clogged.
The alternate cleaning and disinfection method, described by Bessesen et al.
for use in healthcare when conventional practices are not practical, has been used successfully.10
The effectiveness of an alternate filter cartridge disinfection solution and procedure may be uncertain:
Some elastomeric respirators have filter cartridges that prevent disinfectant contact with the filter media.
If available, these filter cartridges should be used in the contingency capacity strategies approach.
These filter cartridges provide added assurance that the filter media will not be contacted with the cleaning and disinfectant solutions.
These cartridges may be wiped down repeatedly.
NOTE: P-series filters can generally be re-used until they are soiled, damaged, or difficult to breathe through.
Caution should be used when using the filter for a live virus, and thorough disinfection of the filter cartridge should be completed.
Practices not approved by the manufacturer can increase the risk and uncertainty of re-using damaged or degraded components.
This must be balanced against other available HCP protection options to sustain effective HCP protection and patient care.
Modified procedures used during emergencies should be assessed and documented in the written RPP, including alternate cleaning and disinfection practices.
For disinfection, diluted household bleach solutions, alcohol solutions with at least 70% ethyl alcohol, and EPA-registered household disinfectants should be effective against coronaviruses.
For use of diluted household bleach solutions, follow disinfectant manufacturers instructions for proper disinfectant application, PPE, and ventilation.
CAUTION: The following may degrade or damage the respirator components.
Some EPA-approved disinfectants are also available as ready to use at 2700 ppm for 1 minute; however, these strong solutions could impact the integrity of the respirator components.
Products with EPA-approved emerging viral pathogens claims external iconare expected to be effective against SARS-CoV-2.
Follow the manufacturers instructions for all cleaning and disinfection products (e.g concentration, application method and contact time, etc.).
Disinfectants listed on the EPAs Registered Antimicrobial Products for Use Against Novel Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, could be used to inactivate the virus.18 Those intended for use with soft surfaces may be preferred.
All respirators used in routine situations must be inspected by properly trained individuals before each use and during cleaning.
This includes a check of respirator function, tightness of connections, and the condition of the various parts, such as the facepiece, head straps, valves, cartridges, and canisters or filters.
Inspect elastomeric parts for pliability and signs of deterioration.
Respirators that fail an inspection or are otherwise found to be defective should be removed from service and discarded, repaired, or adjusted in accordance with the following procedures:
Discard filter cartridges if they become visibly soiled or wet, if they are visibly damaged, or if the respirator becomes notably harder to breathe through.
Otherwise, change out the filters periodically.
Provided the cartridge integrity and filter have not been compromised, current practice shows that conservatively, the filters could be used for at least one year.18
Workers must be educated and trained on how to safely use their elastomeric respirator.
Employers should follow the respirator manufacturers instructions and OSHA guidance to the greatest extent possible; and consider training recommendations described in the Bessesen protocol.
The NIOSH JETFIT study provides excellent training for contingency situations.
To ensure respirator maintenance is conducted properly, employers should establish disinfection and cleaning procedures and train staff to perform the required maintenance including storage, inspection, distribution, repair or replacement, cleaning, disinfection, and disposal.
Employers may identify a central location for disinfection or train individual users to clean and disinfect their respirators.
Initial surface cleaning should be done at point of use before moving to a central location for disinfection.
19, 20, 21
Respirators must be stored in a clean, non-contaminated location in a manner that does not distort the facepiece or straps.
Respirators need to be thoroughly air dried prior to storage.
During periods of crisis surge capacity, several strategies in addition to the contingency strategies may be followed.
If it is impossible for individual HCP to have dedicated elastomeric respirators, the same elastomeric respirator may be used by multiple HCP.
Elastomeric respirators issued to more than one employee should be cleaned, disinfected, and inspected before being worn by different individuals.
One option is to label the respirator, conduct surface cleaning at the point of use, and return to a central location to be disinfected by central staff before reissuing the respirator to a different user.
Machines may be used to expedite the cleaning, sanitizing, rinsing, and drying of large numbers of elastomeric respirators.
In general, the respirators elastomeric components should not be cleaned with solvents (e.g acetone, ethanol) or exposed to temperatures greater than 50°C (122°F).
Post-cleaning inspection by personnel trained in the necessary maintenance tasks should still be conducted to assure respirator functionality has not been degraded.
Extreme care should be taken to limit tumbling, agitation, or exposure to temperatures above those recommended by the manufacturer, as these conditions may result in damage to the respirators.
Ultrasonic cleaners, clothes washing machines, dishwashers, and clothes dryers have been specially adapted and successfully used for cleaning and drying elastomeric respirators.
22
OSHA has issued temporary enforcement guidance about switching from quantitative to qualitative fit testing, and OSHA is waiving the annual fit testing requirements as described above.7 If fit testing is not possible, leakage at the face seal could occur and the protection provided to the wearer may be significantly reduced.
For any tight-fitting respirator, such as FFRs and elastomeric respirators, a successful user seal check must be performed with each donning.
Under serious outbreak conditions in which respirator supplies are severely limited, HCP may not have the opportunity to ever be fit tested on a respirator before needing to use it.
While this is not ideal, in this scenario, HCP should work with their employers to choose the respirator that fits them best, as, even without fit testing, a respirator will provide better protection than using no respirator at all or using a surgical mask.
If possible, the HCP should start with the size used previously for fit testing, but as size can vary by manufacturer and model, a different size may be needed to achieve a good fit.
If fit testing has never been done, the following recommendations are still useful.
Fit testing is necessary to confirm if a respirator does or does not fit.
During a crisis, however, when conventional requirements cannot be implemented, healthcare professionals should be able to determine if they have obtained a reasonable fit if they have had training and they perform a successful user seal check prior to each use of the respirator.
1 An Assigned Protection Factor (APF) is the workplace level of respiratory protection that a respirator is expected to provide to employees when used in conjunction with an effective RPP.
1 OSHA (Standards – 29 CFR).
Occupational Safety and Health Standards.
Available from: https://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_id=12716&amp;p_table=standardsexternal icon
2 WHO 2014.
Infection prevention and control of epidemic-and pandemic prone acute respiratory infections in health care.
Available from: https://www.who.int/csr/bioriskreduction/infection_control/publication/en/external icon
3 CDC 2020.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): FAQ about PPE.
Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/respirator-use-faq.html
 4 CDC 2020.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Optimize PPE Supply.
Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/ppe-strategy/index.html
5 3M 2020.
Respiratory Protection for Airborne Exposures to Biohazards.
Available from: https://multimedia.3m.com/mws/media/409903O/respiratory-protection-against-biohazards.pdfpdf iconexternal icon
6 Moldex.
7000 Series Reusable Half Mask Respirator.
Available from: https://www.moldex.com/product/7000-series-half-mask-respirator/external icon
7 OSHA 2020.
Temporary Enforcement Guidance – Healthcare Respiratory Protection Annual Fit-Testing for N95 Filtering Facepieces During the COVID-19 Outbreak.
Available at: https://www.osha.gov/memos/2020-03-14/temporary-enforcement-guidance-healthcare-respiratory-protection-annual-fitexternal icon
8 NIOSH 1996.
NIOSH Guide to the Selection and Use of Particulate Respirators (Certified Under 42 CFR 84).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, DHHS (NIOSH) Publication 96-101, https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/96-101/default.html
9 Pompei LA, Kraft CS, Brownsword EA 2020.
Training and Fit Testing of Health Care Personnel for Reusable Elastomeric Half-Mask Respirators Compared with Disposable N95 Respirators.
JAMA.
doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4806
10 Bessesen M, Adams JC, Radonovich L, Anderson J 2015.
Disinfection of Reusable Elastomeric Respirators by Health Care Workers: A Feasibility Study and Development of Standard Operating Procedures.
American Journal of Infection Control 43(6):629-634.
11 CDC 2020.
Coronoavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Decontamination and Reuse of Filtering Facepiece Respirators.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/ppe-strategy/decontamination-reuse-respirators.html
12 Rutala WA, Weber DJ 2019.
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee.
Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities, 2008.
13 Lawrence C, Harnish DA, Sandoval-Powers M, Mills D, Bergman M, Heimbuch BK 2017.
Assessment of half-mask elastomeric respirator and powered air-purifying respirator reprocessing for an influenza pandemic.
Am J Infect Control, 45(12):1324-1330.
14 OSHA 29CFR1910.134.
Available from: https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910/1910.134external icon
15 OSHA 1910.134 App B-2 Respirator Cleaning Procedures (Mandatory).
Available from: https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910/1910.134AppB2external icon
16 CDC.
Sequence for Putting On Personal Protective Equipment (PPE).
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/pdfs/PPE-Sequence-508.pdfpdf icon
17 EPA 2020.
List N: disinfectants for use against SARS-CoV-2.
Available from: https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-registration/list-n-disinfectants-use-against-sars-cov-2external icon
18 Personal communications with University of Maryland School of Medicine, March 18, 2020.
19 University of Nebraska Medical Center 2012.
Half Mask Respirator II: Gross Decon, Reassembly, and Storage.
Available at: https://app1.unmc.edu/nursing/heroes/mpv.cfm?updateindex=73&amp;src=ytexternal icon
20 University of Nebraska Medical Center 2011 Half Mask Respirator III: Light Decon and Storage.
Available at: https://app1.unmc.edu/nursing/heroes/mpv.cfm?updateindex=72&amp;src=ytexternal icon
21 CDC 2020.
Elastomeric Respirators for U.S. Healthcare Delivery.
Available from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8wd5Bx2fVDI
22 ATSM International F3387-19, Standard for Respiratory Protection.
23 OSHA 2009.
Respiratory Safety (video).
Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tzpz5fko-fg
24 OSHA 2009.
Seguridad de Máscaras de Respiración.
Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jgRKuRcTGeE
25 University of Nebraska Medical Center 2011.
Half Mask Respirator I: Donning, Doffing and Fit Check.
Available at: https://app1.unmc.edu/nursing/heroes/mpv.cfm?updateindex=71&amp;src=ytexternal iconexternal icon
During a large-scale public health emergency involving a respiratory disease like COVID-19, federal, state, or local stockpiled ventilators should be deployed in a way that optimizes the effectiveness, efficiency, and equity of this scarce resource.
Decisions on the allocation of stockpiled ventilators to facilities should be based on multiple factors, including:1
State and local planners can use the strategies in this guide to assist them when allocating ventilators from public health stockpiles to hospitals and other facilities during a pandemic.
This document is intended to address frequently asked questions about personal protective equipment (PPE).
Nonsterile, disposable patient isolation gowns, which are used for routine patient care in healthcare settings, are appropriate for use by patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
Unlike patient care in the controlled environment of a healthcare facility, care and transport by EMS present unique challenges because of the nature of the setting.
Coveralls are an acceptable alternative to gowns when caring for and transporting suspect COVID-19 patients.
While no clinical studies have been done to compare gowns and coveralls, both have been used effectively by healthcare workers in clinical settings during patient care.
CDCs Considerations for Selecting Protective Clothing used in Healthcare for Protection against Microorganisms in Blood and Body Fluids guidance provides a comparison between gowns and coveralls, including test methods and performance requirements.
Coveralls typically provide 360-degree protection because they are designed to cover the whole body, including the back and lower legs, and sometimes the head and feet as well.
This added coverage may be necessary for some work tasks involved in medical transport.
However, coveralls may lead to increased heat stress compared to gowns due to the total area covered by the fabric.
Training on how to properly remove (doff) a coverall is important to prevent self-contamination.
Comparatively, gowns are easier to put on and, in particular, to take off.
Nonsterile disposable patient examination gloves, which are used for routine patient care in healthcare settings, are appropriate for the care of patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
CDC Guidance does not recommend double gloves when providing care to suspected or confirmed 2019-COVID patients.
According to CDC Guidance, extended length gloves are not necessary when providing care to suspected or confirmed COVID-19 patients.
Extended length gloves can be used, but CDC is not specifically recommending them at this time.
1ASTM D6319-Standard Specification for Nitrile Examination Gloves for Medical Applications
2ASTM D3578 Standard Specification for Rubber Examination Gloves
3ASTM D5250 Standard Specification for Poly(vinyl chloride) Gloves for Medical Application
4ASTMD 6977 Standard Specification for Polychloroprene Examination Gloves for Medical Application
Most often, spread of respiratory viruses from person-to-person happens among close contacts (within 6 feet).
Recent studies indicate that people who are infected but do not have symptoms likely also play a role in the spread of COVID-19.
CDC recommends everyday preventive actions to prevent the spread of respiratory viruses, such as avoiding people who are sick, avoiding touching your eyes or nose, and covering your cough or sneeze with a tissue.
People who are sick should stay home and not go into crowded public places or visit people in hospitals.
Workers who are sick should follow CDC guidelines and stay home when they are sick.
A respirator is a personal protective device that is worn on the face or head and covers at least the nose and mouth.
A respirator is used to reduce the wearers risk of inhaling hazardous airborne particles (including infectious agents), gases or vapors.
Respirators, including those intended for use in healthcare settings, are certified by the CDC/NIOSH.
An N95 FFR is a type of respirator which removes particles from the air that are breathed through it.
These respirators filter out at least 95% of very small (0.3 micron) particles.
N95 FFRs are capable of filtering out all types of particles, including bacteria and viruses.
The requirements for surgical N95 respirators that make them resistant to high velocity streams of body fluids and help protect the sterile field can result in a design that has a higher breathing resistance (makes it more difficult to breath) than a typical N95 respirator.
Also, surgical N95 respirators are designed without exhalation valves which are sometimes perceived as warmer inside the mask than typical N95 respirators.
If you are receiving complaints, you may consider having employees who are not doing surgery, not working in a sterile field, or not potentially exposed to high velocity streams of body fluids wear a standard N95 with an exhalation valve.
An N95 respirator with an exhalation valve does provide the same level of protection to the wearer as one that does not have a valve.
The presence of an exhalation valve reduces exhalation resistance, which makes it easier to breathe (exhale).
Some users feel that a respirator with an exhalation valve keeps the face cooler and reduces moisture build up inside the facepiece.
However, respirators with exhalation valves should not be used in situations where a sterile field must be maintained (e.g during an invasive procedure in an operating or procedure room) because the exhalation valve allows unfiltered exhaled air to escape into the sterile field.
The NIOSH approval number and approval label are key to identifying NIOSH-approved respirators.
The  NIOSH approval label can be found on or within the packaging of the respirator or sometimes on the respirator itself.
The required labeling of NIOSH-Approved N95 filtering facepiece respiratorspdf icon  includes the NIOSH name, the approval number, filter designations, lot number, and model number to be printed on the respirator.
You can verify that your respirator approvals are valid by checking the NIOSH Certified Equipment List (CEL).
When NIOSH becomes aware of counterfeit respirators or those misrepresenting NIOSH approval on the market, these respirators are posted on the Counterfeit Respirators / Misrepresentation of NIOSH-Approval webpage to alert users, purchasers, and manufacturers.
NIOSH does not require approved N95 filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs) be marked with an expiration date.
If an FFR does not have an assigned expiration date, you should refer to the user instructions or seek guidance from the specific manufacturer on whether time and storage conditions (such as temperature or humidity) are expected to have an effect on the respirators performance and if the respirators are nearing the end of their shelf life.
In times of increased demand and decreased supply, consideration can be made to use N95 respirators past their intended shelf life.
However, the potential exists that the respirator will not perform to the requirements for which it was certified.
Over time, components such as the strap and nose bridge may degrade, which can affect the quality of the fit and seal.
Prior to use of N95 respirators, the HCP should inspect the respirator and perform a seal check.
Additionally, expired respirators may potentially no longer meet the certification requirements set by NIOSH.
For further guidance, visit Release of Stockpiled N95 Filtering Facepiece Respirators Beyond the Manufacturer-Designated Shelf Life: Considerations for the COVID-19 Response.
Monitoring PPE supply inventory and maintaining control over PPE supplies may help prevent unintentional product losses that may occur due to theft, damage, or accidental loss.
Inventory systems should be employed to track daily usage and identify areas of higher than expected use.
This information can be used to implement additional conservation strategies tailored to specific patient care areas such as hospital units or outpatient facilities.
Inventory tracking within a health system may also assist in confirming PPE deliveries and optimizing distribution of PPE supplies to specific facilities.
Update: This Interim Guidance was updated and archived on April 12, 2020.
Updates were made to align with revisions to the public health recommendations for community-related exposure to COVID-19, which changed the period of exposure risk from onset of symptoms to 48 hours before symptom onset.
Given the ongoing transmission of COVID-19 in communities across the United States and the role that asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic individuals with COVID-19 play in transmission, the feasibility and benefits of formal contact tracing for exposures in healthcare settings are likely limited and this guidance is being archived.
No further updates are planned.
Healthcare facilities should consider foregoing contact tracing for exposures in a healthcare setting in favor of universal source control for healthcare personnel (HCP) and screening for fever and symptoms of COVID-19 before every shift.
Additional infection prevention and control recommendations, including more details about universal source control in healthcare settings are available.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that are common in humans and in many different species of animals, including camels, cattle, cats, and bats.
Rarely, animal coronaviruses can infect people and then spread between people such as with SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and now with SARS-CoV-2.
Published and early reports suggest spread from person-to-person most frequently happens during close exposure to a person infected with COVID-19.
Person-to-person spread appears to occur similar to other respiratory viruses, mainly via respiratory droplets produced when an infected person speaks, coughs, or sneezes.
These droplets can land in the mouths, noses, or eyes of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs.
Although not likely to be the predominant mode of transmission, it is not clear the extent to which touching a surface contaminated with the virus and then touching the mouth, nose, or eyes contributes to transmission.
Recent experience with outbreaks in nursing homes has reinforced that residents and HCP with COVID-19 frequently do not report typical symptoms such as fever or respiratory symptoms and some may not report any symptoms.
Unrecognized asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic infections likely contribute to transmission in these and other healthcare settings.
This interim guidance is intended to assist with assessment of risk, monitoring, and work restriction decisions for HCP with potential exposure to COVID-19.
Separate guidance is available for travelers and exposures in U.S. communities.
Because of their often extensive and close contact with vulnerable individuals in healthcare settings, a conservative approach to HCP monitoring and restriction from work was taken to quickly identify early symptoms and prevent transmission from potentially contagious HCP to patients, HCP, and visitors.
The signs and symptoms* described in this guidance are broader than those described when assessing exposures for individuals not working in healthcare.
Healthcare facilities should have a low threshold for evaluating symptoms and testing symptomatic HCP, particularly those who fall into the high- and medium- risk categories described in this guidance.
This guidance is based on currently available data about COVID-19.
Recommendations regarding which HCP are restricted from work may not anticipate every potential scenario and will change if indicated by new information.
Healthcare facilities, in consultation with public health authorities, should use clinical judgement as well as the principles outlined in this guidance to assign risk and determine need for work restrictions.
CDC remains available for further consultation by calling the Emergency Operations Center at 770-488-7100.
This cautious approach will be refined and updated as more information becomes available and as response needs change in the United States.
Public Health Recommendations after Travel-Associated COVID-19 Exposure
Public Health Recommendations for Community-Related Exposure
Criteria for Return to Work for Healthcare Personnel with Confirmed or Suspected COVID-19 (Interim Guidance)
Strategies to Mitigate Healthcare Personnel Staffing Shortages
Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) in a Healthcare Setting.
Self-monitoring means HCP should monitor themselves for fever by taking their temperature twice a day and remain alert for symptoms of COVID-19 (e.g cough, shortness of breath, sore throat, myalgias, malaise)*.
Anyone on self-monitoring should be provided a plan for whom to contact if they develop fever or respiratory symptoms during the self-monitoring period to determine whether medical evaluation is needed.
Active monitoring means that the state or local public health authority assumes responsibility for establishing regular communication with potentially exposed people to assess for the presence of fever or symptoms of COVID-19 (e.g cough, shortness of breath, sore throat, myalgias, malaise)*.
For HCP with high- or medium-risk exposures, CDC recommends this communication occurs at least once each day.
The mode of communication can be determined by the state or local public health authority and may include telephone calls or any electronic or internet-based means of communication.
For HCP, active monitoring can be delegated by the health department to the HCPs healthcare facility occupational health or infection control program, if both the health department and the facility are in agreement.
Note, inter-jurisdictional coordination will be needed if HCP live in a different local health jurisdiction than where the healthcare facility is located.
Self-Monitoring with delegated supervision in a healthcare setting means HCP perform self-monitoring with oversight by their healthcare facilitys occupational health or infection control program in coordination with the health department of jurisdiction, if both the health department and the facility are in agreement.
On days HCP are scheduled to work, healthcare facilities could consider measuring temperature and assessing symptoms prior to starting work.
Alternatively, a facility may consider having HCP report temperature and absence of symptoms to occupational health prior to starting work.
Modes of communication may include telephone calls or any electronic or internet-based means of communication.
Occupational health or infection control personnel should establish points of contact between the organization, the self-monitoring personnel, and the local or state health departments of authority in the location where self-monitoring personnel will be during the self-monitoring period.
This communication should result in agreement on a plan for medical evaluation of personnel who develop fever or symptoms of COVID-19 (e.g cough, shortness of breath, sore throat, myalgias, malaise)* during the self-monitoring period.
The plan should include instructions for notifying occupational health and the local public health authority, and transportation arrangements to a designated hospital, if medically necessary, with advance notice if fever or symptoms of COVID-19 occur.
The supervising organization should remain in contact with HCP through the self-monitoring period to manage self-monitoring activities and provide timely and appropriate follow-up if symptoms occur in a HCP.
Note, inter-jurisdictional coordination will be needed if HCP live in a different local health jurisdiction than where the healthcare facility is located.
Close contact for healthcare exposures is defined as follows: a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a person with COVID-19 for a prolonged period of time (such as caring for or visiting the patient; or sitting within 6 feet of the patient in a healthcare waiting area or room); or b) having unprotected direct contact with infectious secretions or excretions of the patient (e.g being coughed on, touching used tissues with a bare hand).
Data are limited for definitions of close contact.
Factors for consideration include the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk), clinical symptoms of the patient (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk) and whether the patient was wearing a cloth face covering or facemask (which helps block respiratory secretions from contaminating others and the environment), PPE used by personnel, and whether aerosol generating procedures were performed.
Data are insufficient to precisely define the duration of time that constitutes a prolonged exposure.
However, until more is known about transmission risks, it is reasonable to consider an exposure greater than a few minutes as a prolonged exposure.
Brief interactions are less likely to result in transmission; however, clinical symptoms of the patient and type of interaction (e.g did the patient cough directly into the face of the HCP) remain important.
Recommendations will be updated as more information becomes available.
Risk stratification can be made in consultation with public health authorities.
Examples of brief interactions include: briefly entering the patient room without having direct contact with the patient or their secretions/excretions, brief conversation at a triage desk with a patient who was not wearing a cloth face covering or facemask.
See Table 1 for more detailed information.
Healthcare Personnel: For the purposes of this document, HCP refers to all paid and unpaid persons serving in healthcare settings who have the potential for direct or indirect exposure to patients or infectious materials, including body substances; contaminated medical supplies, devices, and equipment; contaminated environmental surfaces; or contaminated air.
For this document, HCP does not include clinical laboratory personnel.
While body fluids other than respiratory secretions have not been clearly implicated in transmission of COVID-19, unprotected contact with other body fluids, including blood, stool, vomit, and urine, might put HCP at risk of COVID-19.
Table 1 describes possible scenarios that can be used to assist with risk assessment.
These scenarios do not cover all potential exposure scenarios and should not replace an individual assessment of risk for the purpose of clinical decision making or individualized public health management.
Any public health decisions that place restrictions on an individuals or groups movements or impose specific monitoring requirements should be based on an assessment of risk for the individual or group.
Healthcare facilities, in consultation with public health authorities should use the concepts outlined in this guidance along with clinical judgement to assign risk and determine need for work restrictions.
For this guidance high-risk exposures refer to HCP who have had prolonged close contact with patients with COVID-19 (beginning 48 hours before onset of symptoms) who were not wearing a cloth face covering or facemask while HCP nose and mouth were exposed to material potentially infectious with the virus causing COVID-19.
Being present in the room for procedures that generate aerosols or during which respiratory secretions are likely to be poorly controlled (e.g cardiopulmonary resuscitation, intubation, extubation, bronchoscopy, nebulizer therapy, sputum induction) on patients with COVID-19 (beginning 48 hours before onset of symptoms) when the healthcare providers eyes, nose, or mouth were not protected, is also considered high-risk.
Medium-risk exposures generally include HCP who had prolonged close contact with patients with COVID-19 (beginning 48 hours before onset of symptoms) who were wearing a cloth face covering or facemask while HCP nose and mouth were exposed to material potentially infectious with the virus causing COVID-19.
Some low-risk exposures are considered medium-risk depending on the type of care activity performed.
For example, HCP who were wearing a gown, gloves, eye protection and a facemask (instead of a respirator) during an aerosol generating procedure would be considered to have a medium-risk exposure.
If an AGP had not been performed, they would have been considered low-risk.
See Table 1 for additional examples.
Low-risk exposures generally refer to brief interactions with patients with COVID-19 (beginning 48 hours before onset of symptoms) or prolonged close contact with patients (beginning 48 hours before onset of symptoms) who were wearing a cloth face covering or facemask for source control while HCP were wearing a facemask or respirator.
Use of eye protection in addition to a facemask or respirator would further lower the risk of exposure.
Proper adherence to currently recommended infection control practices, including all recommended PPE, should protect HCP having prolonged close contact with patients infected with COVID-19.
However, to account for any inconsistencies in use or adherence that could result in unrecognized exposures, HCP should still perform self-monitoring with delegated supervision.
HCP with no direct patient contact and no entry into active patient management areas who adhere to routine safety precautions do not have a risk of exposure to COVID-19 (i.e they have no identifiable risk).
Currently, this guidance applies to HCP with potential exposure in a healthcare setting to patients with confirmed COVID-19.
However, HCP exposures could involve a person under investigation (PUI) who is awaiting testing.
Implementation of monitoring and work restrictions described in this guidance could be applied to HCP exposed to a PUI if test results for the PUI are not expected to return within 48 to 72 hours.
A record of HCP exposed to a PUI should be maintained and HCP should be encouraged to perform self- monitoring while awaiting test results.
If the results will be delayed more than 72 hours or the patient is positive for COVID-19, then the monitoring and work restrictions described in this document should be followed.
Table 1: Epidemiologic Risk Classification1 for Asymptomatic Healthcare Personnel Following Exposure to Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) or their Secretions/Excretions in a Healthcare Setting, and their Associated Monitoring and Work Restriction Recommendations 
The highest risk exposure category that applies to each person should be used to guide monitoring and work restrictions.
Note:  While respirators confer a higher level of protection than facemasks and are recommended when caring for patients with COVID-19, facemasks still confer some level of protection to HCP, which was factored into our assessment of risk.
aThe risk category for these rows would be elevated by one level if HCP had extensive body contact with the patients (e.g rolling the patient).
bThe risk category for these rows would be elevated by one level if HCP performed or were present for a procedure likely to generate higher concentrations of respiratory secretions or aerosols (e.g cardiopulmonary resuscitation, intubation, extubation, bronchoscopy, nebulizer therapy, sputum induction).
For example, HCP who were wearing a gown, gloves, eye protection and a facemask (instead of a respirator) during an aerosol generating procedure would be considered to have a medium-risk exposure.
HCP in any of the risk exposure categories who develop signs or symptoms compatible with COVID-19 must contact their established point of contact (public health authorities or their facilitys occupational health program) for medical evaluation prior to returning to work
While contact tracing and risk assessment, with appropriate implementation of HCP work restrictions, of potentially exposed HCP remains the recommended strategy for identifying and reducing the risk of transmission of COVID-19 to HCP, patients, and others, it is not practical or achievable in all situations.
Community transmission of COVID-19 in the United States has been reported in multiple areas.
This development means some recommended actions (e.g contact tracing and risk assessment of all potentially exposed HCP) are impractical for implementation by healthcare facilities.
In the setting of community transmission, all HCP are at some risk for exposure to COVID-19, whether in the workplace or in the community.
Devoting resources to contact tracing and retrospective risk assessment could divert resources from other important infection prevention and control activities.
Facilities should shift emphasis to more routine practices, which include asking HCP to report recognized exposures, regularly monitor themselves for fever and symptoms of COVID-19, use facemasks or cloth face coverings for source control, and not report to work when ill. Facilities should develop a plan for how they will screen for symptoms and evaluate ill HCP.
This could include having HCP report absence of fever and symptoms prior to starting work each day.
CDC has released guidance to assist healthcare facilities with mitigating staffing shortages, which include considerations for  allowing asymptomatic HCP who have had an exposure to a COVID-19 patient to continue to work after options to improve staffing have been exhausted and in consultation with their occupational health program.
Refer to that guidance for additional recommendations if this is allowed.
* Fever is either measured temperature &gt;100.0oF or subjective fever.
Note that fever may be intermittent or may not be present in some patients, such as those who are elderly, immunosuppressed, or taking certain medications (e.g NSAIDs).
Clinical judgement should be used to guide testing of patients in such situations.
Respiratory symptoms consistent with COVID-19 are cough, shortness of breath, and sore throat.
Medical evaluation may be recommended for lower temperatures (&lt;100.0oF) or other symptoms (e.g muscle aches, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain headache, runny nose, fatigue) based on assessment by occupational health or public health authorities.
Audience: Managers and their staff engaged in public health clinic settings and field outreach activities in state and local health departments.
Purpose: To provide guidance for the management of public health workers engaged in public health activities that require face-to-face interaction with clients in clinic and field settings.
These activities would include prevention and control programs for TB, STDs, HIV, and other infectious disease activities that would require outbreak or contact investigation, home visits, or partner services, and non-infectious disease-specific programs, e.g syringe services programs, or occupational health activities.
The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) global pandemic has forced public health to reassess its approach to providing care while keeping staff and patients safe.
Mitigation strategies, such as social distancing and sheltering in place, have impacted clinical care and field services across the nation.
As a result, many jurisdictions have limited face-to-face interactions to only the most essential.
It is important to protect healthcare and public health workers from COVID-19 while maintaining their ability to deliver critical public health services.
State, local, tribal, and territorial public health programs need flexibility to reassign tasks and shift priorities to meet these competing needs.
This document provides guidance for protecting public health workers engaged in public health activities that require face-to-face interaction with clients in clinic and field settings.
The guidance has the following objectives:
Activities that should receive highest priority will vary with the level of community COVID-19 transmission, characteristics of the priority populations to be served, local capacity to implement effective prevention and control activities, and availability of effective interventions.
Points to consider include:
Consistent with CDCs guidance for implementation of prevention strategies for communities with local COVID-19 transmission (see community mitigation strategypdf icon), this adapted table lays out two sets of strategies that public health departments should use based on the current level of COVID-19 community transmission.
Substantial: Large scale community transmission, healthcare staffing significantly impacted, multiple cases within communal settings like healthcare facilities, schools, mass gatherings etc.
*Assuming there is adequate availability of quality diagnostic information.
In the absence of such information, other sources of judgement should be sought, such as local public health officials, hospital guidance, or local health care providers.
Workers risk of occupational exposure may vary based on the nature of their work.
Public health programs should assess potential risk for exposure to the virus that causes COVID-19, especially for those staff whose job functions require working with clients in close proximity and in locations where there is known community transmission.
While not all public health staff fall into the category of healthcare personnel (HCP), conducting medical exams or specimen collection procedures where risk of exposure is high, many public health activities for disease prevention and intervention involve face-to-face interactions with patients, partners, and organizations, putting public health staff at risk for acquiring COVID-19.
Per CDC guidance (see https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-criteria.html), close contact is defined as: a) being within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) of a person with COVID-19 for a prolonged period of time; close contact can occur while caring for, living with, visiting, or sharing a healthcare waiting area or room with a person with COVID-19, – or – b) having direct contact with infectious secretions of a person with COVID-19 such as being coughed on.
Public health staff should wear appropriate PPE for the job function that they are performing, in accordance with state and local guidance.
CDC has issued guidance to provide a framework for the assessment and management of potential exposures to the virus that causes COVID-19 and implementation of safeguards based on a persons risk level and clinical presentation: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/guidance-risk-assesment-hcp.html.
This guidance is updated routinely.
Please see the CDC website for additional information about levels of risk.
Public health departments should protect staff as they perform their work functions, and implement workplace strategies (see https://www.osha.gov/Publications/OSHA3990.pdfpdf iconexternal icon) that mitigate transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19.
Protective measures for public health staff may vary by state and local health jurisdiction and should be guided by both state and local community transmission, the type of work that public health staff perform and the associated transmission risk, and state and local resources.
Additional guidance for health departments can be found at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/php/index.html.
In public health clinical settings, it is important to prepare to safely triage and manage patients with respiratory illness, including COVID-19.
All healthcare facilities should be aware of any updates to local and state public health recommendations.
For healthcare settings, key guidance includes:
Program managers may need to provide additional precautions while collecting specimens.
Screening and symptom monitoring of staff who continue to work should also be implemented.
Published infection prevention and control guidance for preparing for and managing patients with COVID-19 in healthcare settings is available at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/infection-control-recommendations.html, with specific guidance for the clinic setting available at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinic-preparedness.html, and includes:
Some facilities such as clinics, grocery stores, and banks in areas with high community transmission have found success with:
While existing recommendations focus primarily on healthcare settings, some public health programs have field-based public health staff that require protection.
Staff who have close contact with patients should be equipped and trained on the use of appropriate respiratory protection and other PPE, as indicated by the current level of community transmission, and job function.
For those having face-to-face interaction with patients for a disease-specific program, more comprehensive PPE may be indicated, depending upon the context, prevalence of COVID-19 in the community, degree of contact with the client, and healthcare activity pursued.
For those working with persons with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 and their asymptomatic close contacts at their home or non-home residential settings, CDC has specific guidance: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/php/guidance-evaluating-pui.html.
For contact tracing, public health programs should consider implementing technology assisted models for client interaction such as those employed increasingly by tuberculosis programs (see https://www.cdc.gov/nchhstp/highimpactprevention/promising-hip-intervention.html), used for monitoring of returning travelers for Ebola, and implemented by sexually transmitted infection programs for partner services.
Technology assisted models include those that are synchronous (such as video chat via Skype, Facetime, Webex, or Zoom, text message, and other social media) and asynchronous (such as recorded video of directly observed therapy (DOT)).
While the use of social media and smart phones is ubiquitous, not all patients have access to this technology.
Patients in need of infectious disease testing and treatment services may also be persons experiencing homelessness, drug use, and mental health diagnoses.
To facilitate disease prevention and control, public health programs must meet these patients where they are, providing field-based support with face-to-face interactions and in-person assistance with navigation of services.
In these instances, public health staff should use appropriate PPE to prevent COVID-19 transmission.
(See guidance on homelessness and COVID-19 at COVID-19 and unsheltered homelessness.)
This may also include provision of face masks for patients, frequent adequate handwashing, and regular disinfection of commonly touched surfaces.
In situations where appropriate respiratory protection and other PPE are not available or community level transmission prevents face-to-face interactions, staff safety must be considered, and alternative means of contacting patients as mentioned above should be pursued.
Public health programs should collaborate with environmental health hospital acquired infections and occupational health programs in order to develop contingency plans to address what to do if a client comes in sick or tests positive, and what to do if an employee comes in sick or tests positive.
The possibility of pre-symptomatic or asymptomatic transmission increases the challenges of managing public health activities, underscoring the importance of prioritizing activities, use of respiratory protection and other PPE, social distancing to reduce exposure to and transmission of COVID-19, and limiting in-person care.
Therefore, workers required to come to an office should wear face masks or cloth face coverings to prevent transmission.
Public health programs are encouraged to explore flexible workplace policies including telecommuting and increased sick leave.
Programs should also explore telemedicine and other ways to use new technologies that may facilitate syndromic evaluation and treatment of patients.
Staff should be reminded to not report to work when they are ill. Be aware of recommended work restrictions and monitoring based on staff exposure to patients with COVID-19.
Employees should be advised to check for any signs or symptoms of illness before reporting to work and to notify their supervisor if they become ill.
Consider implementing a process of screening staff for fever or respiratory symptoms before entering the facility.
Proactively plan for absenteeism with contingency planning that could include altering clinic hours, cross-training staff, or hiring temporary or additional employees.
Programs are encouraged to implement contingency plans to address the following: what to do if a large proportion of the workforce gets sick, what to do if staff need to provide childcare at home due to daycare or school closing, and interruptions in PPE supply.
These recommendations are aimed at assisting state, territorial, local, and tribal health departments to balance the competing demands of their routine infectious disease caseload throughout the COVID-19 response.
CDC programs remain available to consult on disease-specific guidance to aid in prioritization of public health work activities.
Our thanks go out to the public health staff on the front lines who are working to balance these priorities and who rise daily to the challenge of the COVID-19 response.
Services for clients that could be continued or delayed depending on local circumstances:
The source of the content in this document is CDCs National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STDs, and TB Prevention.
CDC guidance for COVID-19 may be adapted by state and local health departments to respond to rapidly changing local circumstances.
Who this is for: Occupational health programs and public health officials making decisions about return to work for healthcare personnel (HCP) with confirmed COVID-19, or who have suspected COVID-19 (e.g developed symptoms of a respiratory infection e.g cough, sore throat, shortness of breath, fever but did not get tested for COVID-19).
Decisions about return to work for HCP with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 should be made in the context of local circumstances.
Options include a test-based strategy or a non-test-based strategy (i.e time-since-illness-onset and time-since-recovery strategy).
Use the Test-based strategy as the preferred method for determining when HCP may return to work in healthcare settings:
If the Test-based strategy cannot be used, the Non-test-based strategy may be used for determining when HCP may return to work in healthcare settings:
HCP with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 who have not had any symptoms should be excluded from work until 10 days have passed since the date of their first positive COVID-19 diagnostic test assuming they have not subsequently developed symptoms since their positive test.
If HCP had COVID-19 ruled out and have an alternate diagnosis (e.g tested positive for influenza), criteria for return to work should be based on that diagnosis.
After returning to work, HCP should:
Maintaining appropriate staffing in healthcare facilities is essential to providing a safe work environment for healthcare personnel (HCP) and safe patient care.
As the COVID-19 pandemic progresses, staffing shortages will likely occur due to HCP exposures, illness, or need to care for family members at home.
Healthcare facilities must be prepared for potential staffing shortages and have plans and processes in place to mitigate them, including considerations for permitting HCP to return to work without meeting all return to work criteria above.
Refer to the Strategies to Mitigate Healthcare Personnel Staffing Shortages document for information.
1All test results should be final before isolation is ended.
Testing guidance is based upon limited information and is subject to change as more information becomes available.
In persons with a persistent productive cough, SARS-CoV-2-RNA might be detected for longer periods in sputum specimens than in upper respiratory tract (nasopharyngeal swab) specimens.
Cloth face covering: Textile (cloth) cover that are intended to keep the person wearing one from spreading respiratory secretions when talking, sneezing, or coughing.
They are not PPE and it is uncertain whether cloth face coverings protect the wearer.
Guidance on design, use, and maintenance of cloth face coverings is available.
Facemask: Facemasks are PPE and are often referred to as surgical masks or procedure masks.
Use facemasks according to product labeling and local, state, and federal requirements.
FDA-cleared surgical masks are designed to protect against splashes and sprays and are prioritized for use when such exposures are anticipated, including surgical procedures.
Facemasks that are not regulated by FDA, such as some procedure masks, which are typically used for isolation purposes, may not provide protection against splashes and sprays.
Respirator: A respirator is a personal protective device that is worn on the face, covers at least the nose and mouth, and is used to reduce the wearers risk of inhaling hazardous airborne particles (including dust particles and infectious agents), gases, or vapors.
Respirators are certified by the CDC/NIOSH, including those intended for use in healthcare.
This guidance applies to all first responders, including law enforcement, fire services, emergency medical services, and emergency management officials, who anticipate close contact with persons with confirmed or possible COVID-19 in the course of their work.
Emergency medical services (EMS) play a vital role in responding to requests for assistance, triaging patients, and providing emergency medical treatment and transport for ill persons.
However, unlike patient care in the controlled environment of a healthcare facility, care and transports by EMS present unique challenges because of the nature of the setting, enclosed space during transport, frequent need for rapid medical decision-making, interventions with limited information, and a varying range of patient acuity and jurisdictional healthcare resources.
When preparing for and responding to patients with confirmed or possible coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), close coordination and effective communications are important among 911 Public Safety Answering Points (PSAPs)— commonly known as 911 call centers, the EMS system, healthcare facilities, and the public health system.
Each PSAP and EMS system should seek the involvement of an EMS medical director to provide appropriate medical oversight.
For the purposes of this guidance, EMS clinician means prehospital EMS and medical first responders.
When COVID-19 is suspected in a patient needing emergency transport, prehospital care providers and healthcare facilities should be notified in advance that they may be caring for, transporting, or receiving a patient who may have COVID-19 infection.
CDCs most current case definition for a person under investigation (PUI) for COVID-19.
Municipalities and local EMS authorities should coordinate with state and local public health, PSAPs, and other emergency call centers to determine need for modified caller queries about COVID-19, outlined below.
Development of these modified caller queries should be closely coordinated with an EMS medical director and informed by local, state, and federal public health authorities, including the city or county health department(s), state health department(s), and CDC.
PSAPs or Emergency Medical Dispatch (EMD) centers (as appropriate) should question callers and determine the possibility that this call concerns a person who may have signs or symptoms and risk factors for COVID-19.
The query process should never supersede the provision of pre-arrival instructions to the caller when immediate lifesaving interventions (e.g CPR or the Heimlich maneuver) are indicated.
Patients in the United States who meet the appropriate criteria should be evaluated and transported as a PUI.
Information on COVID-19 will be updated as the public health response proceeds.
PSAPs and medical directors can access CDCs PUI definitions here.
Information on a possible PUI should be communicated immediately to EMS clinicians before arrival on scene in order to allow use of appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE).
PSAPs should utilize medical dispatch procedures that are coordinated with their EMS medical director and with the local or state public health department.
PSAPs and EMS units that respond to ill travelers at US international airports or other ports of entry to the United States (maritime ports or border crossings) should be in contact with the CDC quarantine station of jurisdiction for the port of entry (see: CDC Quarantine Station Contact List) for planning guidance.
They should notify the quarantine station when responding to that location if a communicable disease is suspected in a traveler.
CDC has provided job aids for this purpose to EMS units operating routinely at US ports of entry.
The PSAP or EMS unit can also call CDCs Emergency Operations Center at (770) 488-7100 to be connected with the appropriate CDC quarantine station.
EMS clinician practices should be based on the most up-to-date COVID-19 clinical recommendations and information from appropriate public health authorities and EMS medical direction.
State and local EMS authorities may direct EMS clinicians to modify their practices as described below.
If a patient with an exposure history and signs and symptoms suggestive of COVID-19 requires transport to a healthcare facility for further evaluation and management (subject to EMS medical direction), the following actions should occur during transport:
The following are general guidelines for cleaning or maintaining EMS transport vehicles and equipment after transporting a PUI:
EMS clinicians should be aware of the follow-up and/or reporting measures they should take after caring for a PUI or patient with confirmed COVID-19:
The responsibilities described in this section are not specific for the care and transport of PUIs or patients with confirmed COVID-19.
However, this interim guidance presents an opportunity to assess current practices and verify that training and procedures are up-to-date.
The EMS Infectious Disease Playbook, published by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Responses Technical Resources, Assistance Center, Information Exchange (TRACIE) is a resource available to planners at https://www.ems.gov/pdf/ASPR-EMS-Infectious-Disease-Playbook-June-2017.pdfpdf iconexternal icon.
Healthcare Personnel Preparedness Checklist for COVID-19 pdf iconPDF
Front-line healthcare personnel in the United States should be prepared to evaluate patients for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The following checklist highlights key steps for healthcare personnel in preparation for transport and arrival of patients with confirmed or possible COVID-19.
□ Stay up to date on the latest information about signs and symptoms, diagnostic testing, and case definitions for coronavirus disease 2019.
□ Review your infection prevention and control policies and CDC infection control recommendations for COVID-19 for:
□ Assessment and triage of patients with acute respiratory symptoms
□ Implementation of Standard, Contact, and Airborne Precautions, including the use of eye protection
□ Source control measures for patients (e.g put facemask on suspect patients)
□ Requirements for performing aerosol generating procedures
□ Be alert for patients who meet the persons under investigation (PUI) definition
□ Know how to report a potential COVID-19 case or exposure to facility infection control leads and public health officials
□ Know who, when, and how to seek evaluation by occupational health following an unprotected exposure (i.e not wearing recommended PPE) to a suspected or confirmed coronavirus disease  2019 patient
□ Remain at home, and notify occupational health services, if you are ill
□ Know how to contact and receive information from your state or local public health agency
The true impact of a COVID-19 outbreak in a U.S. community cannot be predicted.
However, all healthcare facilities can take steps now to prepare for such an outbreak and protect both their patients and staff.
Currently there are no medications to treat or vaccines to prevent COVID-19.
Therefore, community approaches to slowing transmission including appropriate hand hygiene, cough etiquette, social distancing, and reducing face-to-face contact with potential COVID-19 cases are needed to slow disease transmission and reduce the number of people who get sick.
In each healthcare facility, the primary goals include:
Purpose of this document: This interim guidance outlines goals and strategies for all U.S. healthcare facilities to prepare for and respond to community spread of coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19).
Although it is not possible to predict the future course of the outbreak, planning for a scenario in which many persons become ill and seek care at the same time is an important part of preparedness and can improve outcomes if an outbreak occurs.
Therefore, preserving healthcare system functioning is paramount.
It is critical for healthcare facilities to continue to provide care for all patients, irrespective of COVID-19 infection status, at the appropriate level (e.g home-based care, outpatient, urgent care, emergency room, or hospitalization).
Facilities may need to respond to a surge in patients requiring care.
Concentrated efforts will be required to mobilize all aspects of healthcare to reduce transmission of disease, direct people to the right level of care, and decrease the burden on the healthcare system.
Public health guidance will shift as the COVID-19 outbreak evolves.
All healthcare facilities should be aware of any updates to local and state public health recommendations.
Key Goals for the U.S. healthcare system in response to the COVID-19 outbreak are to:
Actions to take now to prepare for an outbreak of COVID-19
Plan to Take the Following Actions if COVID-19 is spreading in your community 
Considerations for specific settings (In addition to above)
Several major impacts can be anticipated during a severe outbreak that could affect the operations of healthcare facilities.
These include surges in patients seeking care, the potential for workforce absenteeism from personal or family illness, and effects from social distancing measures such as school closures.
Healthcare facilities will likely need to adjust the way they triage, assess and care for patients using methods that do not rely on face-to-face care.
Shifting practices to triaging and assessing ill patients (including those affected by COVID-19 and patients with other conditions) remotely using nurse advice lines, provider visits by telephone, text monitoring system, video conference, or other telehealth and telemedicine methods can reduce exposure of ill persons with staff and minimize surge on facilities.
Many clinics and medical offices already use these methods to triage and manage patients after hours and as part of usual practices.
Recent reports suggest that approximately 80% of COVID-19 patients (of all ages) have experienced mild illnessi.
Managing persons at home who are ill with mild disease can reduce the strain on healthcare systems—however, these patients will need careful triage and monitoring.
Promoting the increased use of telehealth
Shifts in the way that healthcare is delivered during a COVID-19 outbreak response will be complex.
Thorough and consistent communications between all components of the public health and healthcare system will be needed in every community.
For example, providers in medical offices, clinics, and other outpatient settings must be informed and know their roles.
Pre-hospital care by emergency management services (EMS) and public-safety answering points (PSAPs) will also need to be aware of any altered transport guidance so they can conduct in-home assessments and triage per local guidance.
i  Wu Z, McGoogan JM.
Characteristics of and Important Lessons from the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Outbreak in China.
JAMA Internet 2020; available from: https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2762130external icon
COVID-19Surge is a spreadsheet-based tool that hospital administrators and public health officials can use to estimate the surge in demand for hospital-based services during the COVID-19 pandemic.
A user of COVID-19Surge can produce estimates of the number of COVID-19 patients that need to be hospitalized, the number requiring ICU care, and the number requiring ventilator support.
The user can then compare those estimates with hospital capacity, using either existing capacity or estimates of expanded capacity.
With COVID-19Surge, users define the population in the hospital catchment area or local jurisdiction.
The user also enters the number of cases to date, and the available hospital resources (non-ICU beds, ICU beds, and mechanical ventilators).
Users can assess up to three community mitigation strategies simultaneously and compare the impacts on hospital resources versus a no intervention scenario.
Can COVID-19Surge be used to accurately estimate the impact of COVID-19?
The numbers generated through COVID-19Surge are estimates.
They DO NOT reflect what will actually occur during the pandemic.
Rather, they are estimates for a given set of scenarios.
COVID-19Surge should be used to plan and prepare a response to a surge in demand for hospital-based resources due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Can users change the input variables?
Yes.
When you download and open the COVID-19Surge, all inputs are pre-populated with numbers and estimates based on published sources.
Users can change the values in the tool that best illustrate the situation in their jurisdiction.
Further, we encourage users to change input values and explore the impact of various scenarios.
Explanations are provided in the accompanying manual.
COVID-19Surge uses the Windows* operating system (Microsoft Windows 2010 or higher) and Excel (Microsoft Office 2013 or higher).
The full functionality of COVID-19Surge is supported in the desktop version of Microsoft Office® for Windows.
Some functionality may not be available in Microsoft Office for Macs or in the browser version of Office 365.
*Microsoft Windows and Office are copyrighted products produced by Microsoft Corporation, WA.
The use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
We recommend downloading and saving the COVID-19Surge spreadsheet to your computer, then open the spreadsheet from your computer.
This will allow the spreadsheet to open in Excel instead of your web browser.
Open the COVID-19Surge spreadsheet and click the box at the top of the document that says, Enable Macros, or Enable Content (depending on version of Excel being used).
After enabling macros, click the Start button on the cover page to start navigating the tool.
If you encounter any issues, contact HEMU@cdc.gov with a subject line COVID-19Surge tool inquiry.
Below are some examples of the output produced by COVID-19Surge for a population of 1 million persons; results were calculated using the default values in the tool.
The top graph shows the estimated number of daily ICU beds  required under different intervention scenarios.
The bottom two graphs provide additional, detailed estimates of the number of daily ICU beds needed, assuming no intervention (bottom left) and (bottom right) assuming a medium intensity intervention (50% reduction in infectiousness due to community interventions).
The red lines shown in the two bottom graphs plot the available ICU beds.
The black lines show daily cases requiring ICU admittance, with the solid lines estimated assuming 2.6 persons infected per infectious person, and the dotted lines estimated assuming 2.0 persons infected per infectious person (note: not all lines are visible due to the scale).
A COVID-19Surge user can alter such output by readily changing one or more of the input values.
Example output: Estimated demand for ICU beds assuming different levels of effectiveness for community interventions
Example output: Details of estimated demand for ICU beds assuming different levels of: i) Numbers infected per infectious person (Ro); ii) effectiveness for community interventions
Planning for community spread of COVID-19 is critical for maintaining healthcare services during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
All U.S. hospitals should be prepared for the possible arrival of patients with COVID-19.
All hospitals should ensure their staff are trained, equipped and capable of practices needed to:
The following checklist can help hospitals assess and improve their preparedness for responding to a community-wide outbreak of COVID-19.
Each hospital will need to adapt this checklist to meet its unique needs and circumstances.
This checklist should be used as one of several tools for evaluating current plans or in developing a comprehensive COVID-19 preparedness plan.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Hospital Preparedness Checklistpdf icon
Nursing homes and other long-term care facilities can take steps to assess and improve their preparedness for responding to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
This checklist should be used as one tool to develop a comprehensive COVID-19 response plan, including plans for:
The checklist identiﬁes key areas that long-term care facilities should consider in their COVID-19 planning.
Long-term care facilities can use this tool to self-assess the strengths and weaknesses of current preparedness efforts.
This checklist does not describe mandatory requirements or standards; rather, it highlights important areas to review to prepare for the possibility of residents with COVID-19.
Preparedness Checklist for Nursing Homes and Long-Term Care Facilities pdf iconPDF-1MB
Find signs for your clinic and infection prevention guidelines: www.cdc.gov/COVID19
Who is this for: Healthcare facilities who may be experiencing staffing shortages due to COVID-19
What is it for: To assist healthcare facilities in mitigating healthcare personnel staffing shortages that might occur because of COVID-19.
Maintaining appropriate staffing in healthcare facilities is essential to providing a safe work environment for healthcare personnel (HCP) and safe patient care.
As the COVID-19 pandemic progresses, staffing shortages will likely occur due to HCP exposures, illness, or need to care for family members at home.
Healthcare facilities must be prepared for potential staffing shortages and have plans and processes in place to mitigate these, including providing resources to assist HCP with anxiety and stress.
There are Contingency and Crisis Capacity Strategies that healthcare facilities should consider in these situations.
For example, if, despite efforts to mitigate, HCP staffing shortages occur, healthcare systems, facilities, and the appropriate state, local, territorial, and/or tribal health authorities might determine that HCP with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 could return to work before the full Return to Work Criteria have been met.
Several of the Crisis Capacity Strategies are dependent on HCP wearing a facemask for source control while at work.
Given ongoing shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE), facilities should refer to and implement relevant Strategies for Optimizing the Supply of Facemasks.
When staffing shortages are anticipated, healthcare facilities and employers, in collaboration with human resources and occupational health services, should use contingency capacity strategies to plan and prepare for mitigating this problem.
At baseline, healthcare facilities must:
Contingency capacity strategies for healthcare facilities include:
Adjusting staff schedules, hiring additional HCP, and rotating HCP to positions that support patient care activities.
Developing regional plans to identify designated healthcare facilities or alternate care sites with adequate staffing to care for patients with COVID-19.
Developing plans to allow asymptomatic HCP who have had an unprotected exposure to the virus that causes COVID-19 to continue to work.
Prioritizing HCP with suspected COVID-19 for testing, as testing results will impact when they may return to work and for which patients they might be permitted to provide care.
Developing criteria to determine which HCP with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 (who are well enough to work) could return to work in a healthcare setting before meeting all Return to Work Criteria—if shortages continue despite other mitigation strategies.
When staffing shortages are occurring, healthcare facilities and employers (in collaboration with human resources and occupational health services) may need to implement crisis capacity strategies to continue to provide patient care.
When there are no longer enough staff to provide safe patient care:
Cloth face covering: Textile (cloth) covers that are intended to keep the person wearing one from spreading respiratory secretions when talking, sneezing, or coughing.
They are not PPE and it is uncertain whether cloth face coverings protect the wearer.
Guidance on design, use, and maintenance of cloth face coverings is available.
Facemask: Facemasks are PPE and are often referred to as surgical masks or procedure masks.
Use facemasks according to product labeling and local, state, and federal requirements.
FDA-cleared surgical masks are designed to protect against splashes and sprays and are prioritized for use when such exposures are anticipated, including surgical procedures.
Facemasks that are not regulated by FDA, such as some procedure masks, which are typically used for isolation purposes, may not provide protection against splashes and sprays.
Respirator: A respirator is a personal protective device that is worn on the face, covers at least the nose and mouth, and is used to reduce the wearers risk of inhaling hazardous airborne particles (including dust particles and infectious agents), gases, or vapors.
Respirators are certified by the CDC/NIOSH, including those intended for use in healthcare.
Americas medical providers deliver the best care possible and are trusted sources of health information for their patients and the community.
CDC is committed to arming them with the accurate and helpful information they need to treat patients with COVID-19, keep other patients and staff safe, and empower patients to protect their own health.
Leveraging telemedicine whenever possible is the best way to protect patients and staff from COVID-19.
However, when telemedicine is not possible, simple actions can help to reduce the risk of spread and keep people safe.
CDCs Prepare to Care for COVID-19 is a resource with practical tools clinicians can use to care for patients with COVID-19, and will be regularly updated to help clinicians adapt as the outbreak unfolds.
Outdoors sign – Stop patients with respiratory symptoms.
Indoors sign – Refer patients with respiratory symptoms to the front desk.
Patient handout with tips for home care.
pdf iconPDF – 1 Page | Spanishpdf icon | Chinesepdf icon | Vietnamesepdf icon | Koreanpdf icon

Factsheet – How to Put On &amp; Take Off PPE.
8.5×11 file pdf iconPDF – 2 pages

Poster – How to Put On &amp; Take Off PPE.
11×17 file pdf iconPDF – 1 page
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is working closely with international partners to respond to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
CDC provides technical assistance to help other countries increase their ability to prevent, detect, and respond to health threats, including COVID-19.
This document is provided by CDC and is intended for use in non-US healthcare settings.
This document is intended to guide national-level coordination, healthcare facilities, and implementing partners in considering and planning high-priority IPC activities to prevent healthcare-associated transmission of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19 virus).
Aspects of this document are relevant for all countries, but a focus is placed on priorities for low- and middle-income settings given resource constraints.
The goal of IPC activities in the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) response is to support the maintenance of essential healthcare services by preventing healthcare-associated transmission of SARS-CoV-2 among healthcare workers (HCW) and patients.
This document focuses on implementation of rapid identification of COVID-19 in healthcare facilities, which forms the basis for subsequent isolation, testing and management decisions.
Planning and coordination of activities should be conducted in collaboration with emergency response officials, in addition to relevant public health officials (e.g Ministry of Health, sub-national health offices, facility administration).
This document addresses specific details on prioritized activities around rapid identification of COVID-19 in healthcare facilities under four different epidemiological scenarios of COVID-19 transmission.
However, national and sub-national public health authorities and healthcare facilities in all countries should be doing certain core activities to support and prepare for the start of any of the activities outlined in section 5, regardless of the current state of COVID-19 transmission in the country.
National and sub-national public health authorities play a critical role in enabling priority IPC activities at healthcare facilities.
Specific areas of focus for national and sub-national authorities should include:
Note: there may be situations within a country whereby different geographic areas meet different scenario criteria.
Ministries of Health, in coordination with relevant stakeholders, should consider the appropriateness and feasibility of applying a single set of prioritized IPC activities across the country matched to the most severe transmission scenario met versus implementing multiple sets of prioritized IPC activities in differently affected geographic units.
Experience in this pandemic has shown that once a region is at scenario 2 (confirmed cases, no known community transmission), aggressive testing strategies of undiagnosed respiratory infections may quickly reveal underlying community transmission.
This can result in a rapid progression to scenario 4 (widespread community transmission), sometimes within a little as a week.
Thus it is absolutely critical that countries prepare aggressively for future epidemiologic scenarios even as the implement activities for their current situation.
Ministries of Health and healthcare facilities must act quickly once cases are identified to prevent and prepare for scenario 4 (widespread community transmission).
Limitations in laboratory testing can make implementing systematic triage for COVID-19 at inpatient facilities in countries with no known cases very challenging.
This is the priority activity in order to prevent COVID-19 patients from arriving unrecognized at healthcare facilities.
Carrying out widespread systematic COVID-19 triage at healthcare facilities when cases are all epidemiologically linked is of lower priority.
Systematic triage should be carried out widely in facilities with access to laboratory testing as this will allow the facility to quickly confirm cases for the purposes of isolation.
In areas without laboratory testing capacity, systematic triage should be carried out only at facilities that at are at high risk (e.g have a high likelihood of having cases) and can consider using a highly specific case definition (to avoid non COVID-19 cases being isolated with non-cases)
1 High-risk facilities should be defined by public health authorities considering: proximity to facilities or communities with known COVID-19 cases, including those across administrative or international borders as well as prioritizing facilities seeing large numbers of patients at high risk of being a COVID-19 case and where introduction would be highly disruptive (e.g large referral hospitals)
Regardless of epidemiologic scenario in a country, once an inpatient facility is housing suspected or confirmed COVID-19 cases, specific IPC precautions for isolation will apply.
These are outlined by the World Health Organization and accessible at the links below.
Pursuant to this document, facilities with confirmed cases may need to carry out prioritized activities from other epidemiologic scenarios even if those scenarios do not represent the country-wide COVID-19 situation.
This could include, for instance, a hospital with confirmed COVID-19 cases choosing to conduct active screening of healthcare workers for signs and symptoms of COVID-19, despite this not being listed under the routine priority activities in that countrys epidemiologic scenario.
National readiness (WHO): https://www.who.int/publications-detail/national-capacities-review-tool-for-a-novelcoronavirusexternal icon
WHO COVID-19 surveillance definition: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/global-surveillance-for-human-infection-with-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)external icon
WHO guidance on infection prevention and control: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/technical-guidance/infection-prevention-and-controlexternal icon
WHO Pandemic flu planning checklist (see section 4.0): https://www.who.int/influenza/preparedness/pandemic/influenza_risk_management_checklist_2018/en/external icon
CDC would like to acknowledge April Baller, MD, Infection Prevention and Control Lead, World Health Emergency Programme and Maria Clara Padoveze RN, PhD, Technical officer, IPC unit at the World Health Organization.
This document is provided by CDC for use in non-US healthcare settings.
This slide deck is a reference for content on this page and can be used for training.
This document is intended for healthcare facilities that are receiving or are preparing to receive patients with suspected or confirmed coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
This includes healthcare facilities providing either inpatient or outpatient services.
It should be used to guide implementation of procedures at triage that can be effective at preventing transmission of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19 virus) to patients and healthcare workers (HCWs).
This document was developed based on current data on COVID-19 and experience with other respiratory viruses and will be updated as more information becomes available.
The sorting out and classificationexternal icon of patientsexternal icon or casualties to determine priority of need and proper place of treatmentexternal icon.1      During infectious disease outbreaks, triage is particularly important to separate patients likely to be infected with the pathogen of concern.
This triage SOP is developed in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic and does not replace any routine clinical triage already in place in healthcare facilities (e.g.
Manchester triage system or equivalent) to categorize patients into different urgency categories.
The main route of transmission of COVID-19 is through respiratory droplets generated when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
Any person who is in close contact with someone who has respiratory symptoms (e.g sneezing, coughing, etc.)
is at risk of being exposed to potentially infective respiratory droplets.2   Droplets may also land on surfaces where the virus could remain viable for several hours to days.
Transmission through contact of hands with contaminated surfaces can occur following contact with the persons mucosa such as nose, mouth and eyes.
*definition of patients at high risk for COVID-19 will change depending on where countries are in the stage of outbreak (e.g.
no or limited community transmission vs. widespread community transmission).
See Appendix 2 for the different epidemiologic scenarios.
CDC would like to acknowledge April Baller, MD,  Infection Prevention and Control Lead, WHO Health Emergency and Maria Clara Padoveze, RN, PhD, Technical officer, IPC unit, WHO  for their valuable contributions to this SOP.
Countries with no or limited community transmission (cases in the community are linked to known chain of transmission)


Countries with widespread community transmission (inability to relate confirmed cases though chains of transmission for large number of COVID-19 cases)
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is working closely with international partners to respond to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
CDC provides technical assistance to help other countries increase their ability to prevent, detect, and respond to health threats, including COVID-19.
This document is provided by CDC and is intended for use in non-US healthcare settings.
This slide deck is a reference for content on this page and can be used for training
This document provides guidance on the identification or screening of healthcare workers (HCWs)1 and inpatients with suspected COVID-19.
Rational, requirements, and considerations will be discussed for three broad case identification strategies:
To support the activities for these strategies, this document provides an initial discussion on the importance of defining the signs/symptoms of persons with COVID-19, general best practices, and surveillance capacities.
Uncertainty remains in defining a generalizable set of characteristic signs and symptoms for COVID-19.
At best, current evidence suggests substantial variability ranging from mild to severe and based on only partially described patient-level factors.
The most commonly reported signs and symptoms in the current literature include:
However, additional non-specific or atypical symptoms include:
Further, elderly patients may present differently than younger populations.
Given these limitations, facilities should define a standardized set of signs and symptoms (e.g fever and/or cough/shortness of breath) to screen HCWs and patients for suspected COVID-19.
A high level of suspicion is critical to ensure cases do not go unrecognized due to likely substantial proportion of patients and healthcare workers presenting with atypical or minimal symptoms.
In addition to a specific strategy for the identification of suspected COVID-19 cases, there are general best practices that will improve both healthcare worker and inpatient COVID-19 screening.
Some examples include:
Monitor and Manage Ill and Exposed Healthcare Workers
Establish Reporting within and between Healthcare Facilities and to Public Health Authorities
Facility-based surveillance for healthcare-associated infections (HAIs), including infections in healthcare workers and inpatients, is one of the WHOs eight core components of infection prevention and control.
While surveillance is a critical component of providing safe healthcare, it is important to recognize that it requires expertise, good quality data, and an established infection prevention and control (IPC) program and thus, may require time to set up2.
For this reason, during public health emergency response, healthcare facilities are encouraged to initially implement facility-based suspect COVID-19 patient case finding (surveillance) feasible with existing surveillance capacities.
Health facility surveillance capacity varies greatly even within health systems.
A realistic appraisal of capacity can help identify the best strategy for a given context.
A general description of surveillance capacities based on existing HAI surveillance activity is provided for guidance.
Objective:  Prevent exposure of at-risk patients and staff to symptomatic COVID-19 positive healthcare workers.
Figure: Passive identification of healthcare workers with suspected COVID-19
All healthcare workers self-assess for fever and/or a defined set of newly present symptoms indicative of COVID-19.
If fever or respiratory symptoms are present, healthcare workers:
Establishes mechanisms for the identification of healthcare workers at increased likelihood of infection with minimal resource requirements.
Figure: Enhanced passive identification of healthcare workers with suspected COVID-19
In addition to passive strategy, establish a plan to remind or prompt workers to self-assess for symptoms consistent with COVID-19.
Common reminders include automated text messages or phone calls.
Evidence suggests that simple automatic reminders can increase adherence.
Figure: Active identification of healthcare workers with suspected COVID-19
All healthcare workers present for in-person evaluation of symptoms and fever prior to each shift.
If symptoms consistent of COVID-19 are reported or observed, healthcare workers are provided with immediate follow-up actions.
All healthcare workers report (e.g by call or text) the absence or presence of symptoms consistent with COVID-19 remotely each day.
Staff that fail to report or report symptoms are followed up.
While there is limited evidence for the benefit of active healthcare worker monitoring, active strategies will theoretically result in increased healthcare worker adherence to self-evaluation of symptoms, thus enhancing patient protection.
The development of acute respiratory infection and healthcare-associated pneumonia are common complications of hospitalization.
However, it is important that clinicians maintain a high level of suspicion for COVID-19 when there is a compatible presentation.
Because healthcare facilities often represent a gathering of individuals at higher risk of infection and adverse outcome, the potential of outbreak and harm to patients requires special effort to ensure any inpatient COVID-19 cases are identified.
A goal of identifying inpatients with suspected COVID-19 is to guide infection prevention and control (IPC) strategies to prevent or limit transmission in healthcare setting.
See interim WHO guidance hereexternal icon7.
Figure: Passive strategy for identification of inpatients with suspected COVID-19
Clinicians are also made aware of what to do if they suspect COVID-19 in a hospitalized patient, including isolation precautions, PPE use, reporting/informing IPC focal point at the facility and public health authorities, and how to obtain testing, if available
Applicable at all HAI surveillance capacity levels (i.e Very Low to High)
Minimal disruption of existing clinical practice and no requirement for standardized data collection or form completion.
Strategy seeks to encourage recognition and reporting by astute clinicians.
Figure: Enhanced passive strategy for identification of inpatients with suspected COVID-19
Enhancement of the passive strategy can be achieved through establishing systems that prompt or require clinicians to regularly review all patients as to their likelihood of harboring COVID-19.
Example enhanced passive strategies might include:
Applicable in most HAI surveillance capacity levels (very low to high)
Dialog and accountability for case finding and reporting can improve empirical case determination, ensure patient evaluations are not missed, and help avoid clinician complacency over the long term
Figure: Active strategy for identification of inpatients with suspected COVID-19
Active case identification involves targeted data collection and review of patient information by groups specifically responsible for the identification of suspected COVID-19 cases.
Examples of groups responsible for case identification and active case identification may include:
High existing surveillance capacity or medium capacity with the provision of additional resources
Smaller more centralized team responsible for case identification can increase overall quality through dedicated training, improved engagement, limiting of competing priorities, and standardization of methods
REFER TO WHO HEREexternal icon FOR CURRENT COVID-19 SURVEILLANCE AND CASE DEFINITIONS
See: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/global-surveillance-for-human-infection-with-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)external icon for details.
Currently, a confirmed case is a person with laboratory confirmation of infection with the COVID-19 virus, irrespective of clinical signs and symptoms.
CDC would like to acknowledge April Baller, MD, Infection Prevention and Control Lead, World Health Emergency Programme and Maria Clara Padoveze RN, PhD, Technical officer, IPC unit at the World Health Organization.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is working closely with international partners to respond to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
CDC provides technical assistance to help other countries increase their ability to prevent, detect, and respond to health threats, including COVID-19.
This document is provided by CDC and is intended for use in non-US healthcare settings.
This slide deck is a reference for content on this page and can be used for training
This document provides guidance to healthcare facilities on the management of visitors to reduce the risk of transmission of SARS-CoV-2, also known as COVID-19 virus, to visitors of patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
This document also considers preventing introduction of SARS-CoV2 into healthcare facilities by visitors during periods of community transmission; the risk of introduction into facilities increases as community transmission becomes more widespread.
Facilities should establish policies and procedures for managing, screening, educating, and training all visitors.
1 Refer here for WHO advice on the use of masks in the context of COVID-19: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/advice-on-the-use-of-masks-in-the-community-during-home-care-and-in-healthcare-settings-in-the-context-of-the-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)-outbreakexternal icon
2 Caregivers are defined as parents, spouses, other family members or friends without formal healthcare training per WHO interim guidance for home care for patients with suspected novel coronavirus (COVID-19) infection presenting with mild symptoms, and management of their contacts.
Available from: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/home-care-for-patients-with-suspected-novel-coronavirus-(ncov)-infection-presenting-with-mild-symptoms-and-management-of-contactsexternal icon
3 Refer here for definition of individuals at high risk of COVID-19: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/specific-groups/high-risk-complications.html
Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings
WHO Infection prevention and control of epidemic- and pandemic-prone acute respiratory infections in health careexternal icon
WHO Rational use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)pdf iconexternal icon
Gopalakrishna G, Choo P, Leo YS, Tay BK, Lim YT, Khan AS, Tan CC.
SARS transmission and hospital containment.
Emerg Infect Dis.
2004 Mar;10(3):395-400.
Lee NE, Siriarayapon P, Tappero J, Chen KT, Shuey D, Limpakarnjanarat K, Chavavanich A, Dowell SF; SARS Mobile Response Team Investigators.
Infection control practices for SARS in Lao Peoples Democratic Republic, Taiwan, and Thailand: experience from mobile SARS containment teams, 2003.
Am J Infect Control.
2004 Nov;32(7):377-83.
Mizumoto K, Kagaya K, Zarebski A, Chowell G. Estimating the asymptomatic proportion of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship, Yokohama, Japan, 2020.
Euro Surveill.
2020 Mar;25(10).
Rothe C, Schunk M, Sothmann P, Bretzel G, Froeschl G, Wallrauch C, Zimmer T, Thiel V, Janke C, Guggemos W, Seilmaier M, Drosten C, Vollmar P, Zwirglmaier K, Zange S, Wölfel R, Hoelscher M. Transmission of 2019-nCoV Infection from an Asymptomatic Contact in Germany.
N Engl J Med.
2020 Mar 5;382(10):970-971.
Weber DJ, Rutala WA, Fischer WA, Kanamori H, Sickbert-Bennett EE.
Emerging infectious diseases: Focus on infection control issues for novel coronaviruses (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-CoV and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome-CoV), hemorrhagic fever viruses (Lassa and Ebola), and highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses, A(H5N1) and A(H7N9).
Am J Infect Control.
2016 May 2;44(5 Suppl):e91-e100.
CDC would like to acknowledge the contributions of April Baller, MD, IPC Lead, WHO Health Emergency Programme, Maria Clara Padoveze, RN, PhD, Technical Officer, IPC Unit, WHO, and Benedetta Allegranzi, MD, Technical Lead, IPC Unit, WHO.
Available for Downloadppt icon
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is working closely with international partners to respond to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
CDC provides technical assistance to help other countries increase their ability to prevent, detect, and respond to health threats, including COVID-19.
This document is provided by CDC and is intended for use in non-US healthcare settings.
While new discoveries continue to be made about COVID-19, early reports indicate that person-to-person transmission most often occurs during close contact with an individual infected with COVID-19.
Healthcare workers (HCWs) are not only at higher risk of infection but can also amplify outbreaks within healthcare facilities if they become ill. Identifying and managing HCWs who have been exposed to a patient with COVID-19 is of great importance in preventing healthcare transmission and protecting staff and vulnerable patients in healthcare settings.
These operational considerations are intended to be used by healthcare facilities and public health authorities in non-US healthcare settings, particularly focusing on low- and middle-income countries, assisting with the management of HCWs exposed to a person with confirmed or suspected COVID-19.
This includes but is not limited to:
The goal of HCW risk assessment, work restriction, and monitoring is to:
This document is only intended to advise on the management of HCWs regarding their work within healthcare facilities.
Guidance on management of exposed HCWs outside of healthcare facilities (e.g quarantine, travel-restriction) is beyond the scope of this document.
Recommendations are made based on currently available data and subject to change based on newly available information.
Healthcare worker – all paid and unpaid persons serving in healthcare settings who have the potential for direct or indirect exposure to patients or their infectious secretions and materials (e.g doctors, nurses, laboratory workers, facility or maintenance workers, clinical trainees, volunteers).
Low risk exposure – contact with a person with COVID-19 having not met criteria for high-risk exposure.
Active monitoring – healthcare facility or public health authority establishes a minimum of daily communication with exposed HCWs to assess for the presence of fever or symptoms consistent with COVID-193.
Monitoring could involve in-person temperature and symptom checks before starting a shift, or remote contact (e.g telephone or electronic-based communication).
Self-monitoring – HCWs monitor themselves for fever by taking their temperature twice a day and remaining alert for respiratory and other symptoms that may be compatible with COVID-19.
HCWs should be provided a plan for whom to contact if they develop fever or even mild symptoms during the self-monitoring period to determine whether medical evaluation and testing is needed.
Healthcare facilities may choose to manage exposed HCWs in a variety of ways and may consider multiple factors when deciding on a management strategy for exposed HCWs, including:
All healthcare facilities should have an established communication plan for notifying appropriate public health authorities of any HCW who requires testing for COVID-19 during the monitoring period.
Staff should be aware of the established procedures for HCWs who have been exposed to a person with COVID-19 and facilities should develop paid sick leave policies and contract extensions that support the ability for staff to avoid work when ill.
The accompanying flowchart see Figure describes possible scenarios for risk assessment of exposed HCWs.
Any HCW exposed to a person with COVID-19 in a healthcare facility or in the community should be quickly identified and assessed for fever or symptoms of COVID-19.
If found to be symptomatic, they should be immediately restricted from work until a medical evaluation can be completed and testing for COVID-19 considered.
If the exposed worker is not symptomatic, an assessment can be done to determine the risk category of exposure, necessary work restriction, and monitoring for 14 days see Appendix 1pdf iconAppendix 1 word iconDOC – 45 KB.
Ideally, HCWs who had a high-risk exposure should be restricted from work and remain quarantined with active monitoring for COVID-19 symptoms for 14 days after the date of last exposure.
If at any time the worker develops fever or symptoms, they should undergo medical evaluation and COVID-19 testing, if indicated.
Those who test negative should continue to be restricted from work, actively monitored and may return to work at the end of the monitoring period if symptoms are resolved.
Those HCWs who remain asymptomatic over the monitoring period may likewise return to work after 14 days.
See below Considerations When Resources are Limited for alternative strategies if staffing shortages prevent the ability to restrict HCWs from work.
HCWs who had a low-risk exposure and are considered essential staff may continue to work during the 14 days after their last exposure to a COVID-19 patient.
These HCWs should preferably be assigned to COVID-19 patient care and  should perform self-monitoring twice a day.
If the worker is scheduled for a shift, they should take their temperature and self-evaluate for symptoms before reporting to work.
Healthcare facilities can consider establishing protocols in which HCWs under self-monitoring report their temperature and symptom status to IPC staff, employee/occupational health, or a designated supervisor prior to beginning a shift.
If the HCW develops fever or symptoms, they should:
If testing is negative and symptoms are resolved, they may return to work while observing standard precautions and continuing to self-monitor for the remainder of the 14 days.
Some facilities have instructed any exposed staff that continue working during the 14 days post-exposure (e.g asymptomatic low-risk exposure or staff who had symptoms, tested negative and return to work within the exposure period) to wear a medical mask at all times in the facility to reduce the risk of asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic transmission.
Any HCW who tests positive for COVID-19, either in the course of monitoring after an exposure or otherwise, should be immediately restricted from work and public health notified for further case management.
There may be situations in which healthcare facilities are unable to perform contact tracing of all HCWs exposed to a known patient with COVID-19 or unable to carry out an individual risk assessment for all exposed HCWs.
Some of these scenarios include:
When able, facilities have developed a plan for all HCWs to report absence of fever and symptoms to a chosen POC before starting work each day for accountability purposes.
When overall testing capacity has been limited and must be rationed, facilities and public health authorities have prioritized symptomatic HCWs for testing over low-risk groups in the community (e.g young healthy individuals).
If no testing is available, for the purposes of returning to work, these HCWs have been managed as if potentially infected with COVID-19 and can return to work based on the non-test-based strategy described below.
HCWs infected with COVID-19 may return to work after applying one of the two below strategies:
After returning to work, HCWs should continue to adhere to hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, and cough etiquette at all times, and continue to self-monitor for symptoms, seeking medical evaluation if fever or respiratory symptoms recur.
If testing was completed and positive on an asymptomatic HCW, facilities have allowed staff to return to work when repeat testing is negative or, alternatively, no earlier than ten days after the last known positive test, assuming no symptoms develop over that period of time.
HCWs who were a suspect COVID-19 case but could not be tested or declined testing should be managed according to the non-test-based-strategy.
Facilities have considered local testing availability and the facilitys ability to maintain staffing levels when deciding on which testing strategy to apply, and those factors may change over time.
If testing is limited or must be rationed, facilities have used the non-test based strategy to determine return to work, in order to conserve testing for diagnosis of persons suspected of having COVID-19, but it can be considered for HCWs who have prolonged symptoms or have underlying medical conditions that could prolong viral shedding.
While not recommended, in situations of critical staffing shortages some facilities have conferred with the local public health authorities and allowed COVID-19 infected HCWs to return to work earlier than indicated in the above strategies .
This has been determined on a case-by-case basis, and facilities have considered duty restrictions, such as only permitting infected HCWs to care for COVID-19 patients or limiting them to non-patient care activities.
Figure: Flowchart for management of HCWs with exposure to a person with COVID-19 
1Living in the same household as a person with COVID-19; having direct physical contact with a person with COVID-19 (e.g shaking hands) or with their infectious secretions (e.g being coughed on or touching used tissues without gloves); being within 1 meter for 15 minutes or longer with a person with COVID-19 (e.g meeting room, workspace, classroom, or traveling in a conveyance), per WHO guidance: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/global-surveillance-for-human-infection-with-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)external icon
2Appropriate PPE as defined by World Health Organization (WHO) Infection prevention and control during health care when novel coronavirus (nCoV) infection is suspectedexternal icon.
3Subjective or measured fever, cough, or shortness of breath.
HCW should also monitor for mild or atypical symptoms that have been reported in association with COVID-19, including sore throat, runny nose, fatigue, muscle aches, and gastrointestinal symptoms.
For mild or atypical symptoms, medical evaluation and testing should be considered on a case-by-case basis.
If index of suspicion is low, can consider continued symptomatic monitoring and reserve testing for new or worsening symptoms.
4Aerosol-generating procedures include, but are not limited to: tracheal intubation, non-invasive ventilation, tracheotomy, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, manual ventilation before intubation, bronchoscopyexternal icon
5 Could consider a less intensive negative test result requirement (e.g single negative result) depending on local factors, such as availability of testing supplies.
Appendix 1: Risk Assessment for Healthcare Workers Exposed to Persons with COVID-19
PDFpdf icon | Word word icon3 pages
Appendix 2: Self-Monitoring Form for Asymptomatic Healthcare Workers with Low-Risk Exposure
PDFpdf icon | Word word icon2 pages
Adherence to recommended infection prevention and control practices is an important part of protecting HCP and patients in healthcare settings.
All HCP who care for confirmed or suspected COVID-19 patients should adhere to standard and transmission based precautions.
To the extent feasible, healthcare facilities could consider prioritizing HCP who are not at higher risk of developing severe illness from COVID-19 or who are not pregnant to care for confirmed or suspected COVID-19 patients.
If staffing shortages make this challenging, facilities could consider restricting HCP at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 or who are pregnant from being present for higher risk procedures (e.g aerosol-generating procedures) on COVID-19 patients.
Find more information for facilities on mitigating HCP staffing shortages.
HCP who are concerned about their individual risk for severe illness from COVID-19 due to underlying medical conditions while caring for COVID-19 patients can discuss their concerns with their supervisor or occupational health services.
People 65 years and older and people of all ages with serious underlying health conditions — like serious heart conditions, chronic lung disease, and diabetes — seem to be at higher risk of developing severe illness from COVID-19.
Information on COVID-19 in pregnancy is limited.
Pregnant women are not currently considered at increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
However, pregnant women have had a higher risk of severe illness when infected with viruses from the same family as COVID-19 and other viral respiratory infections, such as influenza.
Find more information on pregnancy and risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Take the same precautions recommended for people at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
There are no additional precautions for HCP.
Some HCP may choose to implement extra measures when arriving home from providing healthcare, such as removing any clothing worn during delivery of healthcare, taking off shoes, washing clothing, and immediately showering.
However, these are optional personal practices because there is insufficient evidence on whether they are effective.
Currently, those at greatest risk of infection are persons who have had prolonged, unprotected close contact with a patient with symptomatic, confirmed COVID-19 and those who live in or have recently been to areas with sustained transmission.
For more information, see Risk Assessment.
The available data are currently insufficient to clearly identify risk factors for severe clinical outcomes.
Based on limited data that are available for COVID-19 patients, and data from related coronaviruses such as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and MERS-CoV, people who may be at risk for more severe outcomes include older adults and persons who have certain underlying chronic medical conditions.
Those underlying chronic conditions include chronic lung disease, moderate to severe asthma, cardiac disease with complications, diabetes, or immunocompromising conditions.
Pregnant healthcare personnel (HCP) should follow risk assessment and infection control guidelines for HCP exposed to patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
Adherence to recommended infection prevention and control practices is an important part of protecting all HCP in healthcare settings.
Information on COVID-19 in pregnancy is very limited; facilities may want to consider limiting exposure of pregnant HCP to patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19, especially during higher risk procedures (e.g aerosol-generating procedures) if feasible based on staffing availability.
The onset and duration of viral shedding and the period of infectiousness for COVID-19 are not yet known.
It is possible that SARS-CoV-2 RNA may be detectable in the upper or lower respiratory tract for weeks after illness onset, similar to infections with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV.
However, detection of viral RNA does not necessarily mean that infectious virus is present.
There are reports of asymptomatic infections (detection of virus with no development of symptoms) and pre-symptomatic infections (detection of virus prior to development of symptoms) with SARS-CoV-2, but their role in transmission is not yet known.
Based on existing literature, the incubation period (the time from exposure to development of symptoms) of SARS-CoV-2 and other coronaviruses (e.g.
MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV) ranges from 2–14 days.
SARS-CoV-2 RNA has been detected in upper and lower respiratory tract specimens, and SARS-CoV-2 virus has been isolated from upper respiratory tract specimens and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.
SARS-CoV-2 RNA has been detected in blood and stool specimens, and SARS-CoV-2 virus has been isolated in cell culture from the stool of some patients, including a patient with pneumonia 15 days after symptom onset.
The duration of SARS-CoV-2 RNA detection in upper and lower respiratory tract specimens and in extrapulmonary specimens is not yet known but may be several weeks or longer.
Duration of several week or longer has been observed in cases of MERS-CoV or SARS-CoV infection.
While viable, infectious SARS-CoV has been isolated from respiratory, blood, urine, and stool specimens, viable, infectious MERS-CoV has only been isolated from respiratory tract specimens.
It is not yet known whether other non-respiratory body fluids from an infected person including vomit, urine, breast milk, or semen can contain viable, infectious SARS-CoV-2.
The immune response, including duration of immunity, to SARS-CoV-2 infection is not yet understood.
Patients with MERS-CoV are unlikely to be re-infected shortly after they recover, but it is not yet known whether similar immune protection will be observed for patients with COVID-19.
Yes.
There are commercially developed respiratory panels with multi-pathogen molecular assays that can detect respiratory pathogens, including SARS-CoV-2, influenza and other human coronaviruses that can cause acute respiratory illness.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has a list of diagnostic tests with Emergency Use Authorizationexternal icon (EUA) and of tests being offered without, or prior to, EUAexternal icon.
Patients can be infected with more than one virus at the same time.
Coinfections with other respiratory viruses in people with COVID-19 have been reported.
Therefore, identifying infection with one respiratory virus does not exclude SARS-CoV-2 virus infection.
Clinicians considering use of chest CT scans for diagnosis or management of COVID-19 patients should consider whether such imaging will change clinical management.
The American College of Radiology (ACR) recommends that CT should not be used to screen for COVID-19, or as a first-line test to diagnose COVID-19, and that CT should be used sparingly and reserved for hospitalized, symptomatic patients with specific clinical indications for CT.
Appropriate infection control procedures should be followed before scanning subsequent patients.
For more information see, ACR Recommendations for the use of Chest Radiography and Computed Tomography (CT) for Suspected COVID-19 Infectionexternal iconexternal icon.
Healthcare providers should immediately notify infection control personnel at their facility if they suspect COVID-19 in a patient.
If a patient tests positive, providers should report that positive result to their local/state health department.
There is currently no FDA-approved post-exposure prophylaxis for people who may have been exposed to COVID-19.
For information about registered clinical trials of investigational therapeutics for pre or post exposure prophylaxis of SARS-CoV-2 infection, visit ClinicalTrials.govexternal icon.
For more information on movement restrictions, monitoring for symptoms, and evaluation after possible exposure to COVID-19, see Interim US Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Persons with Potential Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Exposure in Travel-associated or Community Settings and Interim U.S Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure in a Healthcare Setting to Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The National Institutes of Health recently published guidelines on prophylaxis use, testing, and management of COVID-19 patients.
For more information, please visit: National Institutes of Health: Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Treatment Guidelinesexternal icon.
Not all patients with COVID-19 will require medical supportive care.
Clinical management for hospitalized patients with COVID-19 is focused on supportive care for complications, including supplemental oxygen and advanced organ support for respiratory failure, septic shock, and multi-organ failure.
Empiric testing and treatment for other viral or bacterial etiologies may be warranted.
Corticosteroids are not routinely recommended for treatment of viral pneumonia or ARDS, due to the potential for prolonging viral replication, as has been observed with MERS coronavirus and influenza.
Corticosteroids should be avoided unless they are indicated for another reason (e.g COPD exacerbation or refractory septic shock following the Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelinesexternal iconexternal icon).
For information on investigational therapies, see Therapeutic Options for Patients with COVID-19.
Not all patients with COVID-19 require hospital admission.
Patients whose clinical presentation warrants in-patient clinical management for supportive medical care should be admitted to the hospital under appropriate isolation precautions.
Some patients with initial mild clinical presentation may worsen in the second week of illness.
The decision to monitor these patients in the inpatient or outpatient setting should be made on a case-by-case basis.
This decision will depend not only on the clinical presentation, but also on the patients ability to engage in self-monitoring, the feasibility of safe isolation at home, and the risk of transmission in the patients home environment.
For more information, see Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in a Healthcare Setting and Interim Guidance for Implementing Home Care of People Not Requiring Hospitalization for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Patients can be discharged from the healthcare facility whenever clinically indicated.
Isolation should be maintained at home if the patient returns home before the time period recommended for discontinuation of hospital Transmission-Based Precautions.
Decisions to discontinue Transmission-Based Precautions or in-home isolation can be made on a case-by-case basis in consultation with clinicians, infection prevention and control specialists, and public health authorities based upon multiple factors, including disease severity, illness signs and symptoms, and results of laboratory testing for COVID-19 in respiratory specimens.
See Interim Considerations for Disposition of Hospitalized Patients with COVID-19.
For non-hospitalized persons, see Interim Guidance for Implementing Home Care of People Not Requiring Hospitalization for COVID-19, and Discontinuation of In-Home Isolation for Immunocompromised Persons.
When available, respirators (or facemasks if a respirator is not available), eye protection, gloves, and gowns should be used for the care of patients with known or suspected COVID-19 infection, including women who are pregnant.
For more information, please see Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings.
During respirator shortages, care should be taken to ensure that N95 respirators are reserved for situations where respiratory protection is most important, such as performance of aerosol-generating procedures on patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 infection.
In such shortage situations, facemasks might be used for other types of patient care.
Alternatives to N95 respirators might be considered where feasible.
These include other classes of NIOSH-approved filtering facepiece respirators, half facepiece or full facepiece elastomeric respirators, and powered air-purifying respirators (PAPRs) where feasible.
All of these alternatives will provide equivalent or higher protection than N95 respirators when properly worn.
However, PAPRs and elastomeric respirators should not be used in surgical settings due to concerns that exhaled air may contaminate the sterile field.
For more information please see: Strategies for Optimizing the Supply of N95 Respirators: Conventional Capacity Strategies.
When respirator supplies are restored, the facility can switch back to use of N95 respirators for all care of patients with known or suspected COVID-19 infection.
For more information, please see Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings.
Based on limited data, forceful exhalation during the second stage of labor would not be expected to generate aerosols to the same extent as procedures more commonly considered to be aerosol generating (such as bronchoscopy, intubation, and open suctioning.
Forceful exhalation during the second stage of labor is not considered an aerosol-generating procedure for respirator prioritization during shortages over procedures more likely to generate higher concentrations of infectious respiratory aerosols.
When respirator supplies are restored, as with all clinical care activities for patients with known or suspected COVID-19, HCP should use respirators (or facemasks if a respirator is not available), eye protection, gloves, and gowns during the second stage of labor, in addition to other personal protective equipment that may be typically indicated for labor and delivery.
For more information please see: Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control FAQs
Based on limited data, high-flow oxygen use is not considered an aerosol-generating procedure for respirator prioritization during shortages over procedures more likely to generate higher concentrations of infectious respiratory aerosols (such as bronchoscopy, intubation, and open suctioning).
Patients with known or suspected COVID-19 should receive any interventions they would normally receive as standard of care.
When respirator supplies are restored, as with all clinical care activities for patients with known or suspected COVID-19, respirators (or facemasks if a respirator is not available), eye protection, gloves, and gowns should be used by HCP for the care of pregnant patients with known or suspected COVID-19.
For more information please see: Healthcare Infection Prevention and Control FAQs
Clinicians should use their judgment to determine if a patient has signs and symptoms compatible with COVID-19 and whether the patient should be tested.
Fever is the most commonly reported sign; most patients with confirmed COVID-19 have developed fever and/or symptoms of acute respiratory illness (cough, difficulty breathing).
Data regarding COVID-19 in pregnancy are limited; according to current information, presenting signs and symptoms are expected to be similar to those for non-pregnant patients, including the presence of fever.
Other considerations that may guide testing are epidemiologic factors such as the occurrence of local community transmission of COVID-19 infections.
As part of evaluation, clinicians are strongly encouraged to test for other causes of respiratory illness and peripartum fever.
For more information please see: Evaluating and Testing Persons for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
HCP in labor and delivery healthcare settings should follow the same infection prevention and control recommendations and personal protective equipment recommendations as all other HCP.
If HCP are exposed to patients with COVID-19 infection, guidance is available for HCP and healthcare facilities on steps to take.
For more information, please see: Interim U.S.
Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health Management of Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure in a Healthcare Setting to Patients with Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19)
Several patients with COVID-19 have been reported to present with concurrent community-acquired bacterial pneumonia.
Decisions to administer antibiotics to COVID-19 patients should be based on the likelihood of bacterial infection (community-acquired or hospital-acquired), illness severity, and antimicrobial stewardship issues.
For more information, see Diagnosis and Treatment of Adults with Community-acquired Pneumonia: An Official Clinical Practice Guideline of the American Thoracic Society and Infectious Diseases Society of Americaexternal iconexternal icon.
There are currently no antiviral drugs approved by FDA to treat COVID-19.
See Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
CDC is currently not aware of scientific evidence establishing a link between ACE-I or ARBs and risk of contracting or severity of COVID-19.
The American Heart Association, the Heart Failure Society of America, and the American College of Cardiology recommendexternal icon continuation of ACE-I or ARB medications for all patients already prescribed those medications for indications such as heart failure, hypertension, or ischemic heart disease.
Cardiovascular disease patients who are diagnosed with COVID-19 should be fully evaluated by a healthcare professional before adding or removing any treatments, and any changes to their treatment should be based on the latest scientific evidence.
Patients who rely on ACE-I or ARBs to treat chronic conditions and have additional questions should speak to their healthcare provider for individualized management.
The National Institutes of Health recently published guidelines on prophylaxis use, testing, and management of COVID-19 patients.
For more information, please visit: National Institutes of Health: Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Treatment Guidelinesexternal icon.
CDC is currently not aware of scientific evidence establishing a link between NSAIDs (e.g ibuprofen, naproxen) and worsening of COVID‑19.
FDAexternal iconexternal icon, the European Medicines Agencyexternal icon, the World Health Organization, and CDC are continuing to monitor the situation and will review new information on the effects of NSAIDs and COVID-19 disease as it becomes available.
For those who wish to use treatment options other than NSAIDs, there are other over-the-counter and prescription medications approved for pain relief and fever reduction.
Patients who rely on NSAIDs to treat chronic conditions and have additional questions should speak to their healthcare provider for individualized management.
Patients should use NSAIDs, and all medications, according to the product labels and advice of their healthcare professional.
People with moderate to severe asthma, particularly if not well controlled, might be at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19.
Based on what we currently know about COVID-19, the selection of therapeutic options through guideline-recommended treatment of asthma has not been affected.
National asthma guidelinesexternal icon are available.
Continuation of inhaled corticosteroids is particularly important for patients already using these medications because there is no evidence of increased risk of COVID-19 morbidity with use of inhaled corticosteroids and an abundance of data showing reduced risk of asthma exacerbation with maintenance of asthma controller therapy.
Patients with asthma but without symptoms or a diagnosis of COVID-19 should continue any required nebulizer treatments.
Selection of therapeutic options through guideline-recommended treatment of asthma exacerbations has not been affected by what we currently know about COVID-19.
Systemic corticosteroids should be used to treat an asthma exacerbation per national asthma guidelinesexternal icon and current standards of care, even if it is caused by COVID-19.
Short-term use of systemic corticosteroids to treat asthma exacerbations should be continued.
There is currently no evidence to suggest that short-term use of systemic corticosteroids to treat asthma exacerbations increases the risk of developing severe COVID-19, whereas there is an abundance of data to support use of systemic steroids for moderate or severe asthma exacerbations.
Patients with asthma but without symptoms or a diagnosis of COVID-19 should continue any required nebulizer for treatments, as recommended by national professional organizations, including the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma &amp; Immunology (AAAAI) and the American College of Allergy, Asthma &amp; Immunology (ACAAI).
If healthcare providers need to be present during nebulizer use among patients who have either symptoms or a diagnosis of COVID-19, use CDCs recommended precautions when performing aerosol-generating procedures (AGPs).
Clinicians may be concerned that an asthma exacerbation is related to an underlying infection with COVID-19.
Clinicians can access laboratory testing for COVID-19 through a network of state and local public health laboratories across the country.
Lists of states and territories with laboratories that are using COVID-19 diagnostic tests are available.
For more information, see Testing in U.S. Clinicians should direct testing questions to their state and localexternal icon health departments.
Patients can be referred to CDCs recommendations for caring for themselves or someone else at home sick with COVID-19.
If nebulizer use at home is necessary for patients with asthma who have symptoms or a diagnosis of COVID-19, use of the nebulizer in a location that minimizes and preferably avoids exposure to any other members of the household, and preferably a location where air is not recirculated into the home (like a porch, patio, or garage) is recommended by national professional organizations, including the American College of Allergy, Asthma &amp; Immunology (ACAAI) by the ACAAI and the Allergy &amp; Asthma Network (AAN).
Limiting the number of people in the room or location where the nebulizer is used is also recommended by the Asthma &amp; Allergy Foundation of America (AAFA).
Nebulizers should be used and cleaned according to the manufacturers instructions.
If nebulizer use in a healthcare setting is necessary for patients who have either symptoms or a diagnosis of COVID-19, use CDCs recommended precautions when performing aerosol-generating procedures (AGPs).
Waste generated in the care of PUIs or patients with confirmed COVID-19 does not present additional considerations for wastewater disinfection in the United States.
Coronaviruses are susceptible to the same disinfection conditions in community and healthcare settings as other viruses, so current disinfection conditions in wastewater treatment facilities are expected to be sufficient.
This includes conditions for practices such as oxidation with hypochlorite (i.e chlorine bleach) and peracetic acid, as well as inactivation using UV irradiation.
Wastewater workers should use standard practices including basic hygiene precautions and wear the recommended PPE as prescribed for their current work tasks when handling untreated waste.
There is no evidence to suggest that employees of wastewater plants need any additional protections in relation to COVID-19.
Medical waste (trash) coming from healthcare facilities treating COVID-2019 patients is no different than waste coming from facilities without COVID-19 patients.
CDCs guidance states that management of laundry, food service utensils, and medical waste should be performed in accordance with routine procedures.
There is no evidence to suggest that facility waste needs any additional disinfection.
More guidance about environmental infection control is available in section 7 of CDCs Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Confirmed COVID-19 or Persons Under Investigation for COVID-19 in Healthcare Settings.
Get and Keep America Open: Supporting states, tribes, localities, and territories
Guidance for states, territories, localities, and tribal communities on preventing infections in diverse settings.
CDC is supporting this critical work by providing:
Content describing non-CDC tools on this site is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to indicate endorsement, actual or implied, of the tools.
Additionally, information on this site is provided as is, for users to evaluate and make their own determination as to their effectiveness.
Several other federal agencies are also supporting this critical effort by providing resources:
Various other organizations are also supporting this critical effort by providing training and other resources:
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
Get and Keep America Open: Supporting states, tribes, localities, and territories
The latest in COVID-19 data and surveillance.
For surveillance of COVID-19 and its cause, SARS-CoV-2, in the United States, CDC is using multiple surveillance systems run in collaboration with state, local and territorial health departments, public health, commercial and clinical laboratories, vital statistics offices, health care providers, emergency departments and academic partners to monitor COVID-19 disease in the United States.
National COVID-19 reporting: CDC works with state and territorial public health partners to coordinate COVID-19 case reporting nationally.
Content describing non-CDC tools on this site is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to indicate endorsement, actual or implied, of the tools.
Additionally, information on this site is provided as is, for users to evaluate and make their own determination as to their effectiveness.
Various other organizations are also supporting this critical effort by providing:
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
Get and Keep America Open: Supporting states, tribes, localities, and territories
Resources for laboratories to conduct testing to identify new cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
CDC is supporting this critical work by providing:
Content describing non-CDC tools on this site is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to indicate endorsement, actual or implied, of the tools.
Additionally, information on this site is provided as is, for users to evaluate and make their own determination as to their effectiveness.
Several other federal agencies support this critical effort by providing:
Various other organizations are also supporting this critical effort by providing:
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
Get and Keep America Open: Supporting states, tribes, localities, and territories 
CDC guidance for COVID-19 may be adapted by state and local health departments to respond to rapidly changing local circumstances.
Resources for conducting contact tracing to stop the spread of COVID-19
Content describing non-CDC tools on this site is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to indicate endorsement, actual or implied, of the tools.
Additionally, information on this site is provided as is, for users to evaluate and make their own determination as to their effectiveness.
Several other federal agencies are also supporting this critical effort by providing:
Various other organizations are also supporting this critical effort by providing:
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
This web page highlights basic principles of contact tracing to stop COVID-19 transmission; detailed guidance for health departments and potential contact tracers is forthcoming.
Contact tracing, a core disease control measure employed by local and state health department personnel for decades, is a key strategy for preventing further spread of COVID-19.
Immediate action is needed.
Communities must scale up and train a large contact tracer workforce and work collaboratively across public and private agencies to stop the transmission of COVID-19.
Contact tracing is a specialized skill.
To be done effectively, it requires people with the training, supervision, and access to social and medical support for patients and contacts.
Requisite knowledge and skills for contact tracers include, but are not limited to:
Given the magnitude of COVID-19 cases and plans to eventually relax mitigation efforts such as stay at home orders and social distancing, communities need a large number of trained contact tracers.
These contact tracers need to quickly locate and talk with the patients, assist in arranging for patients to isolate themselves, and work with patients to identify people with whom the patients have been in close contact so the contact tracer can locate them.
The actual number of staff needed is large and varies depending on a number of factors including but not limited to:
The time to start building the trained workforce is now.
Identifying contacts and ensuring they do not interact with others is critical to protect communities from further spread.
If communities are unable to effectively isolate patients and ensure contacts can separate themselves from others, rapid community spread of COVID-19 is likely to increase to the point that strict mitigation strategies will again be needed to contain the virus.
Based on our current knowledge, a close contact is someone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for at least 30 minutes starting from 48 hours before illness onset until the time the patient is isolated.
They should stay home, maintain social distancing, and self-monitor until 14 days from the last date of exposure.
Contact investigation of patients with COVID-19 potentially exposed at work and patients in health care facilities,  congregate living settings or housing with many people is complex.
Appropriate engagement with infection control and occupational health programs is recommended.
Priority settings include:
In addition to health care workers, it is important to assess interactions between residents and all staff, including but not limited to activity coordinators, food service staff, and sanitation management.
Transitional case management plans should be put in place for patients in isolation and contacts who are separated for monitoring.
Management plans should also be created for transitioning from one setting to another, such as transitions from hospitals to acute or long-term care facilities or home isolation, or from prison and jail to parole and probation.
Separating contacts from people who are not exposed is critical to the success of any contact tracing effort and requires social supports for individual compliance and medical monitoring.
First and foremost is the assessment of an individuals ability to in stay home and maintain social distance from others, a safe environment that provides the necessary supports (private room and bathroom, adequate food and water, and access to medication) and the ability to practice adequate infection control.
For a portion of the U.S. population this will be a challenge, particularly for some of the most vulnerable populations.
Support services for consideration include but may not be limited to housing, food, medicine, and economic supports.
For contacts without a primary care provider, linkage to clinical care may be needed.
Support for medical monitoring includes patient care packages (e.g thermometers, sanitizers, mask, gloves) and technological supports for medical monitoring (e.g mobile phone apps).
If possible, contacts should be asked to voluntarily stay home, monitor themselves, and maintain social distancing from others.
However, health departments have the authority to issue legal orders of quarantine, should the situation warrant that measure.
Engagement of the public with contact tracers must be widely accepted in order to protect friends, family, and community members from future potential infections.
Key public officials and community leaders will need to be engaged and supportive of contact tracing efforts.
Consider reaching out to community leaders as part of the neighborhood-level contact tracing team.
To be successful, a community will need public awareness, and understanding and acceptance of contact tracing and the need for contacts to separate themselves from others who are not exposed.
Community members need to take responsibility to follow the guidance from public health agencies.
Case investigation, contact tracing, and contact follow-up and monitoring will need to be linked with timely testing, clinical services, and agile data management systems to facilitate real-time electronic transmission of laboratory and case data for public health action.
Technology partners are key in the modification of existing systems and the development of new user-friendly data interfaces to manage multiple data streams with seamless interoperability.
Case management tools can help automate key pieces of the contact tracing process, making the overall process more efficient.
Ideally, data systems would also include automated reports to aid in monitoring progress and outcomes of contact tracing.
Data sharing agreements between local, tribal and state, and federal jurisdictions need to be established or augmented to ensure timely and accurate data collection and sharing.
The adoption of emerging technologies that can assist private and public health practitioners with client communication, medical monitoring, and strategies to amplify contact tracing may greatly help with scaling up contact tracing as needed.
Digital Contact Tracing Tools for COVID-19pdf icon
Public health agencies and their partners will need to monitor some key components of their programs to improve performance as needed.
Potential metrics routinely reviewed could include the following process and outcome measures:
Get and Keep America Open: Supporting states, tribes, localities, and territories
Actions that persons and communities can take to help slow the transmission of the virus in communities
CDC is supporting this critical work by providing:
Content describing non-CDC tools on this site is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to indicate endorsement, actual or implied, of the tools.
Additionally, information on this site is provided as is, for users to evaluate and make their own determination as to their effectiveness.
Several other federal agencies are also supporting this critical effort by providing:
Various other organizations are also supporting this critical effort by providing:
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
Get and Keep America Open: Supporting states, tribes, localities, and territories
CDC is using a multi-pronged approach to help enhance and complement the efforts of state, tribal, local, and territorial staff.
This initiative will help health departments with the staffing resources they need for their programs to get and keep America open.
*These numbers reflect data from April 23, 2020 – number of embedded staff can change daily.
†Map includes only field staff located at STLT health departments.
Data source: EASI system; reported prepared by CSTLTS
CDC has 505 existing field staff embedded in state, tribal, local and territorial health agencies, most of whom have pivoted to support the COVID-19 response.
Content describing non-CDC tools on this site is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to indicate endorsement, actual or implied, of the tools.
Additionally, information on this site is provided as is, for users to evaluate and make their own determination as to their effectiveness.
Various other organizations are also supporting this critical effort by providing:
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
Get and Keep America Open: Supporting states, tribes, localities, and territories
Federal fiscal resources for CDC applicants and recipients.
Visit Grants.gov to search for COVID-19 related federal funding announcements.external icon
CDC is supporting the critical work by providing funding and guidance.
Content describing non-CDC tools on this site is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to indicate endorsement, actual or implied, of the tools.
Additionally, information on this site is provided as is, for users to evaluate and make their own determination as to their effectiveness.
Several other federal agencies are also supporting this critical effort by providing:
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
Get and Keep America Open: Supporting states, tribes, localities, and territories
CDC offers free resources including video, handouts, flyers, fact sheets, and posters.
Below are links to current communication tools and resources available for use and distribution.
Content describing non-CDC tools on this site is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to indicate endorsement, actual or implied, of the tools.
Additionally, information on this site is provided as is, for users to evaluate and make their own determination as to their effectiveness.
Several other federal agencies are also supporting this critical effort by providing:
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
Get and Keep America Open: Supporting states, tribes, localities, and territories 
The COVID Response Corps is a new, nationwide community-focused initiative to provide surge staffing and resources to support state, tribal, local, and territorial health departments on the frontlines of the fight against COVID-19.
The Corps builds on and expands CDCs current deployments to communities in need and is part of a multi-pronged approach to help enhance and complement the efforts of state, tribal, local, and territorial staff.
This initiative will help health departments with the staffing resources they need for their programs to get and keep America open.
The COVID Response Corps will include CDC Epidemic Intelligence Service officers, Public Health Associate Program associates, and agency experts from other human resource pools.
Corps members will augment health department teams and will engage in core public health functions, including
Corps members will also help implement and evaluate new technologies, including rapid diagnostic tests and other novel testing platforms, and innovative mobile applications for contact tracing.
For each state, CDC will designate a leader who will work closely with health departments to identify and fill surge staffing needs.
In addition to strengthening health systems through this new initiative, CDC will continue to enhance support to state, tribal, local, and territorial jurisdictions through:
Search for specific COVID-19 guidance across CDC web pages and documents
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will update this interim guidance as needed and as additional information becomes available.
This interim guidance is intended for state and local public health information officers, health communication specialists, health educators, and other public health professionals responsible for planning communication strategies before, during, and after an outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
This guidance provides information about nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) and their use during a COVID-19 outbreak.
NPIs are actions, apart from getting vaccinated and taking antiviral medications, that people and communities can take to help slow the spread of respiratory illnesses like COVID-19.
COVID-19 is an emerging disease and there is more to learn about its transmission, severity, and how it will take shape in the United States.
Everyone can do their part to help plan, prepare, and respond to this emerging public health threat.
CDC has developed recommendations for how to communicate with people in your community about a COVID-19 outbreak.
The Before, During, and After sections of this guide offer suggested strategies to help you plan for and implement these recommendations.
This interim guidance is intended for state and local public health information officers, health communication specialists, health educators, and other public health professionals responsible for planning communication strategies before, during, and after an outbreak of corognavirus disease (COVID-19).
This guidance provides information about nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) and their use during a COVID-19 outbreak.
NPIs are actions, apart from getting vaccinated and taking antiviral medications, that people and communities can take to help slow the spread of respiratory illnesses like COVID-19.
COVID-19 is an emerging disease and there is more to learn about its transmission, severity, and how it will take shape in the United States.
Everyone can do their part to help plan, prepare, and respond to this emerging public health threat.
CDC has developed recommendations for how to communicate with people in your community about a COVID-19 outbreak.
The Before, During, and After sections of this guide offer suggested strategies to help you plan for and implement these recommendations.
Preparedness should focus on strengthening the systems and structures that support effective and well-coordinated communication, and not solely on the development of communication messages.
A good emergency communication plan encourages community leaders and stakeholders to plan now for a COVID-19 outbreak and other types of emergencies.
Before an outbreak occurs, focus on raising awareness and educating audiences about nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) and other public health respiratory infection-prevention strategies.
Identify key community relationships and leverage them to help educate and prepare audiences.
It takes time to build relationships.
Engage internal and external partners and stakeholders early in your planning process.
Coordinating your planning efforts with them can help establish strong lines of communication and ensure that information is consistent before and during a COVID-19 outbreak in your community.
Read and understand Everyday Preventive Actions.
This list identifies personal health habits that people should use all the time, including to help protect themselves and their families against COVID-19 and other respiratory illnesses.
Read and understand CDCs audience-specific COVID-19 NPI guidance documents and communication materials.
Tailored guidance and resources addressing COVID-19 planning are available for individuals and communities.
Take CDCs NPI 101 Web-based training.
State, tribal, local, and territorial public health officials can complete an interactive course (developed by CDC for pandemic influenza preparedness) to increase their understanding of NPIs and how to plan for the use of NPIs before, during, and after a pandemic to help slow spread of disease.
The NPI trainingexternal icon is applicable to COVID-19.
Register for NPI 101 External on CDC TRAIN.
The following free CE credits are provided: 0.2 CEU/CE, 1.5 CHES, 1.75 CME, 1.5 CNE Contact Hours, and 2 CPHCE.
Meet with your existing emergency planning and operations team to update the emergency communication plan for your state or local community.
Establish systems for sharing information with key partners and stakeholders.
Encourage community members to plan for COVID-19.
Create a COVID-19 communication workgroup with representatives from key partners and stakeholders.
Note: Inform workgroup members about workshops, programs, and other activities they can implement within their organizations to inspire the public to consistently practice good personal health habits and prepare for emergencies.
Engage communities in a dialogue about COVID-19 readiness.
Note: Work closely with workgroup members and key partners and stakeholders to address COVID-19 readiness challenges and barriers identified by audiences in your community.
Identifying solutions to help audiences move past barriers may help people change habits and better adapt to changing circumstances during an outbreak.
Identify target audiences and communication channels.
Work with workgroup members and key partners and stakeholders to define audiences and develop strategies to reach every member of the community.
Additional strategies may be needed to reach high-risk and vulnerable populationsexternal icon, such as:
Note: Some NPI actions may draw public attention and can have negative psychosocial and economic consequences on groups and individuals to which they are applied during an outbreak, especially to high-risk and vulnerable populations.
Include in your communication plan strategies and messages that address fear, stigmatization, and discrimination.
Address any gaps in communication resources, materials, or processes.
Identify the training needs of workgroup members and key partners and stakeholders.
Become a resource for COVID-19 information.
Review, exercise, and update communication policies, procedures, and systems for updating, clearing, approving, and disseminating information (both internally and externally).
Note: Communication after-action reports and improvement plans (AARs/IPs) from recent public health emergency responses can offer practical and helpful insights.
Identify existing and needed technology resources.
Create a plan for interacting with news media.
Identify multiple spokespersons or subject matter experts.
Develop a plan for using current social media.
Develop a communication evaluation plan.
Use these questions to help you measure the effectiveness of your emergency communication plan:
Test and update your emergency communication plan.
Maintain ongoing communication with your workgroup members, partners, and stakeholders once COVID-19 is in your local community.
Coordinate COVID-19 communication activities with news media and other channels to ensure consistent messaging.
If you must use technical terminology and concepts, be sure to define them and include examples to help improve understanding.
For example, create messages that clearly explain COVID-19 and NPIs.
Your communication should be early, empathetic, accurate, and effective.
Early communication of COVID-19 information helps limit misinformation and rumors that could contribute to confusion and fear.
Empathetic communication conveys concern and reassurance, empowers people, and reduces emotional turmoil.
Accurate communication provides the facts about a situation and what is being done to resolve it.
Effective communication helps build understanding and guide the public, media, healthcare providers, and other groups in responding to COVID-19 and complying with public health recommendations.
Stay informed about the COVID-19 situation.
Provide instructions for NPI implementation.
Continue to promote the daily practice of everyday preventive actions.
Always give simple, credible, accurate, consistent, and timely information.
Update everyone in your communication chain regularly.
Communicate COVID-19 prevention information to those who are vulnerable and at high risk for complications.
Implement actions outlined in your evaluation plan.
Health communicators can distribute well-designed information that achieves behavior change
Work with workgroup members to identify criteria for phasing out and ending COVID-19 prevention communication activities.
Maintain an attitude of preparedness by continuing to collaborate with workgroup members, partners, and stakeholders to enhance their communication skills on COVID-19 readiness and other public health issues.
Use data from the response to identify new communication strategies and campaigns to facilitate long-term behavior change.
Discuss and note lessons learned.
Maintain and expand your COVID-19 communication workgroup.
The timing of a COVID-19 outbreak cannot be predicted but having a plan in place is very important.
Communication is an essential part of any successful public health response.
Coordinate your planning activities with internal and external partners and stakeholders to help prepare your community for COVID-19 and achieve your emergency communication goals and objectives.
CDC Interim Guidance for Specific Audiences
 Considerations for state and local health departments
Purpose: Homeless service provider sites (such as sites for overnight emergency shelters, day shelters, and meal service providers) can present unique challenges for COVID-19 investigation and public health action.
Because homeless service provider sites can be crowded settings, the virus may spread easily.
Additionally, clients at homeless service provider sites are often older adults or have underlying medical conditions, making it more likely for them to have severe illness from COVID-19.
To help prepare homeless service providers to prevent spread of the virus that causes COVID-19, review CDC guidance specific to homeless service providers and people experiencing homelessness.
The following considerations are for public health response to cases at homeless service provider sites, which is not outlined in the other guidance documents.
Goal – to prevent transmission within the homeless service site.
Goal – to minimize transmission and ensure clients can access care.
Encourage enhanced infection prevention and control
Isolate persons with confirmed COVID-19
Investigate persons with confirmed COVID-19
Relocate people at higher risk of severe illness to individual rooms
Encourage enhanced monitoring for illness
*See below for descriptions of each action
Encourage enhanced infection prevention and control
Isolate persons with confirmed COVID-19
Investigate persons with confirmed COVID-19 
(Note, a traditional contact-tracing investigation is not necessarily recommended.
Rather, identifying other homeless service provider sites visited by persons with confirmed cases of COVID-19 during the time they were considered infectious can help reveal additional facilities that might need to take action).
Relocate those at higher risk of severe illness to individual rooms
Encourage enhanced monitoring for illness
CDC guidance for COVID-19 may be adapted by state and local health departments to respond to rapidly changing local circumstances.
This document was updated to reflect the updates in the Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings.
CDC provides guidance on what specimens to collect when testing for COVID-19.
The latest guidance is available online at Evaluating and Testing Persons for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
As part of the risk assessment and public health management of persons with potential COVID-19, public health personnel will typically conduct interviews and assess these individuals for fever or other symptoms of COVID-19.
In certain circumstances they will also obtain respiratory specimens.
This guidance is intended to address recommended infection prevention and control practices when these activities are performed at a home or non-home residential settings, which warrant additional considerations beyond those described for healthcare settings.
For recommendations on the evaluation of PUIs in healthcare settings refer to the Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Healthcare Settings.
Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) is a disease caused by the newly emerged coronavirus SARS-CoV-2.
To prevent further spread of SARS-CoV-2 and to collect information to better understand the virus and its impact on health outcomes, CDC has developed a form that provides a standardized approach to reporting COVID-19 cases (individuals with at least one respiratory specimen that tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19).
These data are needed to track the impact of the outbreak and inform public health response.
The COVID-19 Case Report Formpdf icon is designed to collect key information on COVID-19 case-patients, including:
Note: Previously, CDC requested that case reports be routinely submitted for Persons Under Investigation (PUI) (using the same form as cases); however, we are no longer requesting this information with one exception – jurisdictions that do not have the capacity to do their own testing and are sending specimens to CDC.
Additional resources to assist in the completion and analysis of the COVID-19 Case Report Form are available:
Healthcare providers who are concerned that a patient may have COVID-19 should contact their localexternal icon or stateexternal icon health department immediately.
At this time, the following steps should be taken for specimens being tested by CDC:
For jurisdictions that have the capacity to do their own laboratory testing
For reporting jurisdictions who are able to assign nCoV IDs for COVID-19 case-patients and use CDCs electronic reporting system: The jurisdiction should enter all cases into CDCs electronic reporting system with the jurisdiction-issued nCoV ID, unless other arrangements to transmit data have been made and approved by CDC.
At this time, we ask that jurisdictions prioritize case reporting.
However, jurisdictions can use the CDCs electronic reporting system to manage PUI data based on their local needs.
For reporting jurisdictions that are not yet able to assign nCoV IDs or use CDCs electronic reporting system: The jurisdiction should call the CDC EOC Watch desk at 770-488-7100 to receive a CDC-issued nCoV ID, and to complete a PUI and Case Report Form.
For jurisdictions that do not have capacity to do their own testing and are sending specimens to CDC for testing: 
This document provides supplemental guidance regarding specimen collection, storage, and shipping to CDC laboratories:
For reporting jurisdictions that are able to assign nCoV IDs for PUIs and use CDCs electronic reporting system: The jurisdiction should enter all PUIs into CDCs electronic reporting system with the jurisdiction-issued nCoV IDs, unless other arrangements to transmit data have been made and approved by CDC.
Testing results will be returned to the state lab per current protocol.
For reporting jurisdictions that are not yet able to assign nCoV IDs or use CDCs electronic reporting system:  The jurisdiction should call the CDC EOC Watch Desk at 770-488-7100 to obtain a CDC-issued nCoV ID number, and complete a PUI and Case Report Form.
Testing results will be returned to the state lab per current protocol.
Please provide an nCoV ID with all specimens submitted to CDC to avoid delays in testing.
The nCoV ID should be included on all PUI and Case Report Forms, specimen testing submission documents (i.e form 50.34 or GFAT) and shipping labels.
All specimens need an nCoV ID for submission to CDC laboratories for testing.
In the event that an nCoV ID is missing, CDC laboratories will freeze the sample, and CDC staff will reach out to the point-of-contact listed on the submission form.
CDC will test the specimen once the nCoV ID has been submitted.
Please refer to the following page for guidance on respiratory specimen collection, storage, and shipment.
Current CDC guidance recommends collection of a single respiratory nasopharyngeal (NP) swab.
Please contact your state or territorial health department for more information on submitting reports of PUI COVID-19 cases.
CDC has separate guidance for exposures in healthcare settings, and U.S. communities.
The epidemic of respiratory illness (COVID-19) caused by novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) is spreading in all regions internationally as well as in many communities in the United States.
As part of a strategy aimed to limit continued COVID-19 seeding of US communities, the US government has recommended that travelers stay home voluntarily for 14 days after traveling from countries with widespread ongoing transmission or on cruise ships or river cruises.
CDCs recommendations for travel-associated exposures are provided below.
Individuals should always follow guidance of the state and local authorities for the area where they are located.
1As of March 27, 2020, this includes all countries.
2See below for guidance on air crews.
Guidance for other essential workers can be found here:  https://www.cisa.gov/publication/guidance-essential-critical-infrastructure-workforceexternal icon.
3For the purpose of this guidance, fever is defined as subjective fever (feeling feverish) or a measured temperature of 100.4oF (38oC) or higher.
Note that fever may be intermittent or may not be present in some people, such as those who are elderly, immunosuppressed, or taking certain medications (e.g NSAIDs).
Crews on Passenger or Cargo Flights
CDC and the Federal Aviation Administration have jointly provided Updated Interim Occupational Health and Safety Guidance for Air Carriers and Crews pdf iconPDF – 7 pagesexternal icon.
This FAA-CDC guidance includes recommendations for air crews to self-monitor under the supervision of their employers occupational health program and to remain in their hotel rooms and practice social distancing while on overnight layovers in the United States (applies to US-based crews and crews based in other countries) or internationally (applies to US-based crews).
These recommendations were made because SARS-CoV-2 is spreading in all regions internationally as well as in the United States.
Also, the rapidly changing situation means country-level geographic risk assessments cannot be relied on to accurately judge the risk to crewmembers in any given location.
As long as they re­­­­­main asymptomatic, crew members may continue to work on flights into, within, or departing from the United States.
Crew members who follow their carriers occupational health plan as well as the FAA-CDC guidance are not subject to restrictions applied to other travelers.
If they develop fever, cough, or difficulty breathing, crew members should self-isolate and be excluded from work on commercial flights immediately, and remain excluded until cleared to work by their occupational health program and public health authorities.
Regardless of residence or travel history, crew members who have known exposure to persons with COVID-19 should be assessed and managed on a case-by-case basis.
The following updates CDC guidance for definitions and management of contacts of persons with COVID-19 contained in Public Health Recommendations after Travel from Areas with Potential Risk of Exposure to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Separate guidance is available for travelers and health care workers.
Public health recommendations have been updated to accommodate new scientific evidence, evolving epidemiology and the need to simplify risk stratification.
New recommendations are based on:
Current guidance based on community exposure, for asymptomatic persons exposed to persons with known or suspected COVID-19 or possible COVID-19
Travelers, health care workers and critical infrastructure workers should follow guidance that include special consideration for these groups.
CDCs recommendations for community-related exposures are provided below.
Individuals should always follow guidance of the state and local authorities.
*For the purpose of this guidance, fever is defined as subjective fever (feeling feverish) or a measured temperature of 100.4oF (38oC) or higher.
Note that fever may be intermittent or may not be present in some people, such as those who are elderly, immunosuppressed, or taking certain medications (e.g NSAIDs).
** Data are limited to define of close contact.
Factors to consider when defining close contact include proximity, the duration of exposure (e.g longer exposure time likely increases exposure risk), whether the individual has symptoms (e.g coughing likely increases exposure risk) and whether the individual was wearing a facemask (which can efficiently block respiratory secretions from contaminating others and the environment).
***Data are insufficient to precisely define the duration of time that constitutes a prolonged exposure.
Recommendations vary on the length of time of exposure from 10 minutes or more to 30 minutes or more.
In healthcare settings, it is reasonable to define a prolonged exposure as any exposure greater than a few minutes because the contact is someone who is ill. Brief interactions are less likely to result in transmission; however, symptoms and the type of interaction (e.g did the person cough directly into the face of the individual) remain important.
Integration of these definitions and actions into communications and actions of public health authorities can be guided by CDCs Implementation of Mitigation Strategies for Communities with Local COVID-19 Transmissionpdf icon
While the content at the links provided below was developed to prepare for, or respond to, an influenza (flu) pandemic, the newly emerged coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory disease that seems to be spreading much like flu.
Guidance and tools developed for pandemic influenza planning and preparedness can serve as appropriate resources for health departments in the event the current COVID-19 outbreak triggers a pandemic.
This document is based on the limited available data as of the release date and general recommendations for zoonotic disease infection prevention and control.
This is a rapidly evolving situation.
Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by COVID-19.
Guidance will be updated as new information becomes available.
States may have their own specific requirements for these circumstances.
Revisions were made on April 23 to reflect the following:
Who this guidance is for: Public health professionals including State Public Health Veterinarians managing people with COVID-19 in home care and isolation who have pets or other animals
This interim guidance is for public health professionals managing the home care and isolation of people with COVID-19 who have pets or other animals (including service or working animals) in the same home.
The intent of this guidance is to facilitate preparedness and establish practices that can help people and animals stay safe and healthy.
At this time, there is no evidence that companion animals, including pets, can spread COVID-19 to people.
Household animals, for the purposes of this document, refers to companion animals, including pets and service animals, that live in a home or on the premises of a home.
This document does not address instances where a person with COVID-19 interacts with livestock (e.g pigs, goats, sheep or cattle), wildlife, or other animals on their premises or through duties outside their home.
Public health veterinarian, for the purposes of this document, refers to the state public health veterinarian or designated public health official responsible for handling animal-related public health issues in their jurisdiction.
A state public health veterinarianpdf iconexternal icon should be contacted by public health professionals, animal health professionals, or veterinarians that have become aware of a household animal with exposure to SARS-CoV-2 and that developed a new, concerning illness that could be compatible with SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Although the clinical spectrum of illness for this virus remains largely undefined in animals, clinical signs more likely to be compatible with SARS-CoV-2 infections in mammalian animals may include a combination of the following:
State public health veterinarians should also be notified if health professionals become aware of an animal that becomes ill with symptoms compatible with SARS-CoV-2 infection and resides or is housed in a setting (e.g shelter, prison, ship) with a person with COVID-19.
Guidance with criteria for evaluating SARS-CoV-2 testing in animals is available.
Some jurisdictions do not have state public health veterinarians, and geographic, resource, and time limitations may prevent public health veterinarians from managing a situation involving household animals.
People with COVID-19 and in home isolation should be advised to restrict interaction with household animals, in addition to following other prevention measures to protect others from COVID-19.
Specifically, while a person with COVID-19 is symptomatic, they should maintain separation from household animals as they would with other household members, and avoid direct contact with pets, including petting, snuggling, being kissed or licked, sleeping in the same location, and sharing food or bedding.
If possible, a household member should be designated to care for pets in the home and should follow standard handwashing practices before and after interacting with the household animal.
If a person with COVID-19 must care for pets or other animals, they should ensure they wash their hands before and after caring for them.
In accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Actexternal icon, service animals should be permitted to remain with their handlers.
Care for household animals that are sick or injured should be coordinated with the households local veterinarian.
In order to ensure the veterinary clinic is prepared for the household animal, the owner should call ahead and arrange the hospital or clinic visit.
If an owner is sick with COVID-19, a family member or friend from outside the household should bring the animal to a veterinary hospital or clinic.
Telemedicine may also be appropriate to provide consultation with a veterinarian if the owner has COVID-19 and is unable to find an alternative caretaker to bring the pet to the hospital.
Veterinarians that see animals with a new, concerning illness that could be compatible with SARS-CoV-2 infection and that had exposure to SARS-CoV-2 (e.g living in or being housed in a setting with a person with COVID-19 such as shelters, prisons, ships) should contact their state public health veterinarianpdf iconexternal icon for guidance regarding testing.
In some instances, household animals may require alternative care or re-homing if the owner is unable to care for the animal or has surrendered the animal.
A home receiving a new household animal should follow standard handwashing practices before and after interacting with the animal.
Shelters receiving household animals should ensure they review and adhere to their established biosafety and biosecurity practices for infectious diseases and review available Interim recommendations for shelters who may intake animals from households where humans with COVID-19 are presentexternal icon.
Interim Recommendations for Intake of Companion Animals from Households where Humans with COVID-19 are Presentexternal icon
NASPHV Compendium of Veterinary Standard Precautions for Zoonotic Disease Prevention in Veterinary Personnelexternal icon
CDCs Healthy Pets, Healthy People Website
World Health Organization (WHO) Websiteexternal icon
World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) Q &amp; A Websiteexternal icon
USDA: Coronavirus Disease 2019external icon
FDA: Coronavirus Disease 2019external icon
Note: The scientific name of the new strain of coronavirus is SARS-CoV-2.
In people, the disease caused by the virus is called Coronavirus Disease 2019, or COVID-19.
Because we are addressing the virus itself in the context of animal health, we refer to it as SARS-CoV-2.
This guidance was collaboratively developed by CDC, USDA, and other federal agencies using a One Health approach.
It may be adapted by state and local health departments to respond to rapidly changing local circumstances.
Who this guidance is for: This guidance was developed for use by state public health veterinarians and state animal health officials.
Purpose: This guidance is intended to guide decisions and help prioritize situations that may warrant SARS-CoV-2 testing in mammalian animal species given limited resources.
The decision to test an animal (including companion animals, livestock, and wild or zoo animals) should be made collaboratively using a One Health approach between local, state, and/or federal public health and animal health officials.
Animal testing for SARS-CoV-2 is available if public health and animal health officials agree the animals case merits testing.
Table 1 (below) is not intended to be prescriptive, but is rather intended to help guide priorities given limited resources.
Routine testing of animals for COVID-19 is not recommended.
Confirmatory testing through USDAs National Veterinary Services Laboratories (NVSL) is not currently available for non-mammalian animals including reptiles, amphibians, birds, or fish.
Currently, there is no evidence that animals can transmit this virus to people.
In some rare situations, people have spread this virus to certain types of animals.
Veterinarians are strongly encouraged to rule out other, more common causes of illness in animals before SARS-CoV-2 testing.
To discuss testing an animal for SARS-CoV-2 in certain circumstances, veterinarians should contact their state public health veterinarianpdf iconexternal icon1 (or designated state official responsible for animal-related issues in public health) and/or their state animal health officialexternal icon2.
Limited information is currently available to characterize SARS-CoV-2 infection in animals; please visit CDCs COVID-19 and Animals page for the most up-to-date information.
Clinical criteria for considering testing for SARS-CoV-2 in animals is based on what is currently known about SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 and is subject to change as additional information becomes available.
Human patients with COVID-19 have symptoms that appear 2-14 days after exposure and include fever, cough, and shortness of breath.
The clinical spectrum of SARS-CoV-2 infection in animals is currently unknown, but animals may present with a combination of respiratory symptoms or gastrointestinal illness based on presentation in a small number of animals and what is known about other coronaviruses including SARS-CoV-13.
Veterinarians should use their best judgment to determine if an animal has been exposed to people with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 and if the animal has clinical signs compatible with SARS-CoV-2 infection3.
Table 1 describes epidemiological risk factors and clinical features that can help guide decisions regarding animal testing.
If public health and animal health2 officials determine that testing an animal for SARS-CoV-2 is appropriate, coordination between One Health partners will be needed.
Please refer to USDAs FAQsexternal icon for sample collection, transport, storage, and result reporting.
If samples are sent to state animal health, university, or private laboratories for initial testing, all samples should be collected in duplicate because any positive samples must be confirmed through additional testing by NVSL.
USDA is responsible for reporting any animal that tests positive for SARS-CoV-2 in the United States to the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE)external icon.
Table 1: Criteria to Guide Evaluation and Laboratory Testing for SARS-CoV-2 in Animals 
NOTE: Veterinarians are strongly encouraged to rule out other, more common causes of illness in animals before SARS-CoV-2 testing.
1 Some jurisdictions do not have state public health veterinarians, or geographic, resource, or time limitations may prevent a state public health veterinarian from managing a situation involving an animal.
2 State animal health officials should contact state wildlife officials for decisions concerning non-captive wildlife.
3 Although the clinical spectrum of illness for this virus remains largely undefined in animals, clinical signs more likely to be compatible with SARS-CoV-2 infection in mammalian animals may include a combination of the following:
4 Close contact is defined as:
5 The International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) governs an assessment of the status of species ranging from critically endangered to least concern: https://www.iucnredlist.org/external icon
Interim guidance to reduce the risk of introducing and transmitting SARS COV-2 (the agent responsible for causing COVID-19 disease) in cooling centers.
Who this guidance is for: Federal, state, local, and tribal jurisdictions in the United States considering opening or operating cooling centers during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Purpose: This document provides interim guidance to reduce the risk of introducing and transmitting SARS COV-2 (the agent responsible for causing COVID-19 disease) in cooling centers.
It should be used in conjunction with existing cooling center operation and management plans, procedures, guidance, resources, and systems.
This interim guidance is based on what is currently known about the transmission and severity of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Extreme heat is a major public health concern in the United States.
Exposure to extreme heat can cause a variety of health problems, including heat stroke and death.
Cooling centers (a cool site or air-conditioned facility designed to provide relief and protection during extreme heat) are used by many communities to protect health during heat events.
However, the use of cooling centers can result in congregating of groups of at-risk people, such as older adults or those with respiratory diseases, and potentially provide a route for the transmission of the SARS COV-2 virus and subsequent development of COVID-19 disease among both visitors and staff.
Consider implementing or expanding programs that provide utility assistance, such as the low-income home energy assistance program (LIHEAP) or similar methods that provide financial assistance for home air conditioner use.
A temporary ban on utility shut-offs during heat waves would allow people to continue using home air conditioning.
This strategy could lower the number of people utilizing cooling centers.
Plan for staff and volunteer absences.
Develop flexible attendance and sick-leave policies.
Staff (and volunteers) may need to stay home when they are sick, caring for a sick household member, or caring for their children during school dismissals.
Identify critical job functions and positions, and plan for alternative coverage by cross-training cooling center staff.
If resources are available, consider implementing verbal screening or temperature checks before admitting visitors to the cooling center.
If possible, provide alternative cooling sites for those showing symptoms of COVID-19 (i.e fever, cough, shortness of breath).
This may be separate rooms within cooling centers or a space that can be used to accommodate visitors with symptoms and separate them from others.
Designate an alternate site, or a separate room and bathroom (if available) for visitors with mild illness who remain at the cooling center.
Be prepared to contact emergency officials (call 911) in the case of severe illness requiring medical assistance.
Maintain social (physical) distancing within cooling centers, ideally at least six feet between individuals.
Consider separation of furniture and creating spaces for individual family units (families who live together do not need to maintain physical distancing in a cooling center).
In larger cooling center facilities, it may be possible to provide adequate space for social distancing among visitors.
Smaller cooling centers can limit the number of visitors, in accordance with local guidelines that limit the size of gatherings.
This could lower capacity, so consider setting up a greater number of smaller cooling centers.
If a lack of potential cooling center sites arises, emergency alternatives such as using parked air-conditioned buses can be utilized.
Communities may also partner with closed businesses, such as movie theaters, as alternative cooling sites.
It may not be possible to locate cooling centers in buildings with high ventilation capacity similar to healthcare facilities.
If possible cooling centers should be equipped with air exchange systems, and be located in buildings with tall ceilings.
Utilize the highest efficiency filters that are compatible with the cooling centers existing HVAC system, and adopt clean-to-dirty directional airflows.
If resources allow, ceiling fans with upward airflow rotation combined with upper-air ultraviolet germicidal irradiation (UVGI) disinfection systems can be utilized.
When conditions allow (low humidity), shaded outdoor spaces with cross-draft airflow augmented by evaporative coolers may provide a safer alternative.
Follow the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) cleaning and disinfection guidelines for community facilities, and cleaning facilities if someone is sick.
Because even individuals with no symptoms can still transmit the virus, and the virus can survive for several days on non-porous surfaces, it is important to continue routine cleaning and disinfection (every day if possible) with a focus on high touch surfaces, including those in common areas and bathrooms.
Enhance communication about COVID-19 onsite.
Use health messages and materials developed by credible public health sources, such as your local and state public health departments or CDC.
Read more about everyday preventive actions.
Share or post COVID-19 posters and CDC Fact Sheets and keep your visitors informed about public health recommendations to prevent disease spread.
Messaging may include:
Identify and address potential language, cultural, and disability barriers associated with communicating COVID-19 information to workers, volunteers, and those visiting cooling centers.
Learn more about reaching people of diverse languages and cultures.
If available, provide COVID-19 prevention supplies onsite at cooling centers.
Have supplies on hand for staff, volunteers, and visitors, such as soap, alcohol-based hand sanitizers that contain at least 60% alcohol, tissues, and trash baskets.
Visitors and staff should wear a cloth face covering, or if supplies are available, be given a clean disposable facemaskpdf icon, even if they are not showing any symptoms.
Cloth face coverings should not be placed on young children under age 2, anyone who has trouble breathing, or is unconscious, incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Place posters that encourage hand hygiene to help stop the spread at the entrance to the facility, at sinks in restrooms, and in other areas where they are likely to be seen.
If water bottles are distributed at the cooling center, ensure visitors to not share bottles or glasses.
Ensure the safety of your building water system and devices after a prolonged shutdown
Stagnant, or standing water can cause conditions that increase the risk for growth and spread of Legionella and other biofilm-associated bacteria.
When water is stagnant, hot water temperatures can decrease to the Legionella growth range (77–108°F, 25–42°C).
Stagnant water can also lead to low or undetectable levels of disinfectant, such as chlorine.
Ensure that your water system is safe to use after a prolonged shutdown to minimize the risk of Legionnaires disease and other diseases associated with water.
Information about Drinking Water, Treated Recreational Water, and Wastewater
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in drinking water.
Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or inactivate the virus that causes COVID-19.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in the feces of some patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
However, it is unclear whether the virus found in feces may be capable of causing COVID-19.
There has not been any confirmed report of the virus spreading from feces to a person.
Scientists also do not know how much risk there is that the virus could be spread from the feces of an infected person to another person.
However, they think this risk is low based on data from previous outbreaks of diseases caused by related coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
There is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, spas, or water play areas.
Proper operation and maintenance (including disinfection with chlorine and bromine) of these facilities should inactivate the virus in the water.
While there is ongoing community spread of COVID-19 of the virus that causes COVID-19, it is important for individuals as well as owners and operators of these facilities to take steps to ensure health and safety:
The virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
Researchers do not know whether this virus can cause disease if a person is exposed to untreated wastewater or sewerage systems.
There is no evidence to date that this has occurred.
At this time, the risk of transmission of the virus that causes COVID-19 through properly designed and maintained sewerage systems is thought to be low.
Researchers have analyzed the available information which suggest that standard municipal and individual septic systemexternal icon wastewater treatment practices should inactivate the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC is reviewing information on COVID-19 transmission as it becomes available.
Guidance will be updated as new evidence is assessed.
Recently, the virus that causes COVID-19 has been found in untreated wastewater.
While data are limited, there is no information to date that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of exposure to wastewater.
Standard practices associated with wastewater treatment plant operations should be sufficient to protect wastewater workers from the virus that causes COVID-19.
These standard practices can include engineering and administrative controls, hygiene precautions, specific safe work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE) normally required when handling untreated wastewater.
No additional COVID-19–specific protections are recommended for workers involved in wastewater management, including those at wastewater treatment facilities.
In most cases, it is safe to wash your hands with soap and tap water during a Boil Water Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials.
If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
CDC: Guidance for reducing health risks to workers handling human waste or sewage
CDC: Healthcare professionals: Frequently asked questions and answers
Occupational Safety and Health Administration: COVID-19 Control and Prevention: Solid waste and wastewater management workers and employersexternal icon
World Health Organization: Water, sanitation, hygiene and waste management for COVID-19external icon
FDA has authorized EUAs for both molecular and serological tests for COVID-19.
Molecular tests are used to diagnose the presence of SARS-CoV-2 infections.
In contrast, serological tests can detect IgG, IgA, and IgM antibodies from an immune response to SARS-CoV-2.
Whenever possible, laboratories should rely on molecular tests to diagnose the presence of SARS-CoV-2 infections.
However, a negative result from molecular testing does not rule out COVID-19.
Most of the PCR-based tests that use two or more targets are likely to have high specificity (few false positives).
However, there is some variation in the stated sensitivity of the different assays, and sensitivity is highly dependent on the stage of the disease.
For this reason, negative results should always be interpreted in the context of the exposure history and symptoms of the patient.
Results from serology testing should not be used as the sole basis to diagnose or exclude SARS-CoV-2 infections or to inform infection status.
Negative results from serology testing do not rule out SARS-CoV-2 infections, particularly for those individuals who have been exposed to the virus and are still within the estimated incubation period.
Until the performance characteristics of serologic tests have been evaluated, it is possible that positive results from such testing may be due to past or present infections with a coronavirus other than SARS-CoV-2.
If a laboratory initially uses serological testing for diagnostic purposes, follow-up testing using a molecular diagnostic test should be performed.
Read: Important Information on the Use of Serological (Antibody) Tests for COVID-19: FDA Letter to Healthcare Providersexternal icon
Public health laboratories can access collection materials for SARS-CoV-2 testing, including swabs and transport media, through the International Reagent Resource (IRR)external icon.
The IRR supports state and local public health laboratories, as well as other qualified laboratories participating in public health surveillance and studies, by providing reagents, tools, and information for studying SARS-CoV-2 and other pathogens.
Through IRR, CDC also provides the reagents that public health laboratories use to detect SARS-CoV-2 virus in respiratory specimens.
One test for SARS-CoV-2 detection is a CDC-developed real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test that received an EUA from FDA on February 4, 2020, to detect the virus in upper and lower respiratory specimens.
IRR also provides several additional commercially produced assays that have received an EUA from FDA to detect SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA in respiratory samples.
Clinical and commercial laboratories conducting SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic testing can acquire test reagents from commercial reagent manufacturers that have received EUA from FDA.
Genomic RNA material for validation purposes can be obtained from BEI Resources as indicated below.
According to FDA, when one entity establishes equivalent performance between parallel testing of the same specimens with the new and original components (including viral transport media VTM), and FDAs review of the validation data indicates that it could be applicable to modifications of other tests with an authorized EUA, FDA will post this information on its website so that other laboratories can refer to the validation for their testing.
Then, other laboratories do not need to conduct their own bridging study for the same modification.
For additional information regarding FDAs policy for modification, see FDAs frequently asked questionsexternal icon website.
CDC has published the following interim guidelines and updates them regularly:
Public health laboratories can order VTM through IRR, as noted above.
Clinical testing laboratories should acquire VTM from commercial sources.
Public health and clinical laboratories can also create their own VTM if they are unable to order it.
In response to VTM shortages, CDC has posted a  standard operating procedurepdf icon to create VTM for laboratories.
Saline is also an acceptable transport media for some COVID-19 diagnostic assays, including the CDC EUA.
Check the Instructions for Use with the EUA Assayexternal icon to see which transport media is acceptable.
Before conducting SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic testing, a laboratory must be CLIA-certified and meet applicable regulatory requirements.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) does not have the authority to grant waivers of exceptions that are not established in a statute or regulation.
For additional information, please refer to the  FAQs on the CMS website: CMS Coronavirus Informationexternal icon.
Tests for SARS-CoV-2 that are offered prior to or without an EUA have not been reviewed by FDA, are not FDA-authorized, and have not received a CLIA categorizationexternal icon.
Thus, those tests are considered high complexity by default until they receive an EUA or other FDA review that indicates they may be performed as moderate complexity or waived tests.
For more information, visit FDA COVID-19 Resourcesexternal icon, and navigate to the section titled General FAQs.
When the FDA grants an EUA for a point-of-care test, that test is deemed to be CLIA-waived.
For the duration of the national emergency declaration for COVID-19, such tests can be performed in any CLIA-certified patient care setting with a certificate of waiver.
The federal CLIA program contracts with states to carry out certain oversight and recording functions of the CLIA program.
The state in which the laboratory is located processes applications for CLIA certificates.
After the laboratory has identified a qualified and certified laboratory directorexternal icon and has provided all required information on the CMS-116 application, a CLIA number will be assigned and the laboratory can begin testing if applicable CLIA requirements have been met.
For additional information, please refer to the FAQs on the CMS website: CMS Coronavirus Informationexternal icon.
CMS has indicated that it will allow laboratories to use temporary testing sites for remote review and reporting of laboratory data, slides, and images if specific criteria are met.
Please refer to this CMS Memorandumexternal icon for additional information.
The public health response to COVID-19 depends on having a comprehensive, real-time, county-level view of COVID-19 laboratory test orders and results.
These data will contribute to understanding disease incidence as well as testing coverage.
On April 5, 2020, the Council for State and Territorial Epidemiologists issued an interim position statement that created a standardized case definitionpdf iconexternal icon and made COVID-19 a nationally notifiable condition.
In addition, laboratory testing data can help identify laboratory supply-chain issues for reagents, personal protective equipment, and other material.
No.
CDC is working with state health departments to collect SARS-CoV-2 laboratory testing data that they already receive from most clinical laboratories.
Data will be collected from state health departments in two phases: Data will be aggregated by county or ZIP code, then states will send de-identified test-level data using electronic HL7 reporting or CSV files.
CDC also receives SARS-CoV-2 testing data directly from state and local public health laboratories, a few large commercial laboratories, and its own laboratories.
For assistance with reporting SARS-CoV-2 testing results, please send an email to DLSinquiries@cdc.gov.
Note: State public health laboratories and select large commercial laboratories that currently report directly to CDC should continue sending that data.
The White House Task Force is currently collecting aggregate data from hospitals for COVID-19 testing conducted at hospital laboratories.
Read: HHS Letter to Hospital Administratorsexternal icon
According to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Actpdf iconexternal icon, or CARES Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services is authorized to receive SARS-CoV-2 laboratory testing data.
CDC is one of several agencies of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
As a result, both HHS and CDC have requested testing data from laboratories.
These data will help the public health response understand the number of tests ordered and performed, results of each test, and the percent positive.
Yes.
All laboratories should always use LOINC and SNOMED Clinical Terms (CT) standards, when available, to accurately report their testing for infection with the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
Standard use of these laboratory codes ensures that the same type of test is represented uniformly across the United States.
For laboratory tests, LOINC codes should be used to represent the question a diagnostic test asks of a specimen (e.g does this specimen have SARS-CoV-2 RNA?
), and SNOMED-CT codes should be used to represent the diagnostic answer (e.g what was detected?).
More background on these terminology standards can be found here:
A list of currently available LOINC codes for the available SARS-CoV-2 tests can be found on SARS-Coronavirus -2 LOINC codesexternal icon.
Note: CDC encourages test developers and laboratories that use SARS-CoV-2 tests to work together to obtain appropriate and interoperable LOINC and SNOMED-CT codes for reporting purposes.
Whenever possible, laboratories should use standard codes that already exist.
Before requesting a new code, search the list of currently available LOINC codesexternal icon for SARS-CoV-2 tests.
If a LOINC test code cannot be identified whose attributes appropriately match the test for which coding is needed, new terms can be submitted, and a new code requested through the LOINC websiteexternal icon.
BEI Resources Repositoryexternal icon was established by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseasesexternal icon at the National Institutes of Health to provide reagents, tools, and information for studying Category A, B, and Cexternal icon priority pathogens, emerging infectious diseaseexternal icon agents, non-pathogenic microbes, and other microbiological materials of relevance to the research community including diagnostic developers.
Centralizing these functions within BEI Resources facilitates access to these materials by the scientific community and ensures quality control of the reagents.
Laboratories using an LDT to detect SARS-CoV-2 should confer with their state public health laboratory for assistance.
If the state public health laboratory cannot assist, contact respvirus@cdc.gov.
CDC is currently performing serological surveys to understand how COVID-19 has spread in the U.S. population.
CDC is not using its serology tests for diagnostic purposes, and thus is not accepting serology test requests intended for COVID-19 patient diagnosis.
Not at this time.
CDC is using its serology test as part of a multi-agency study to evaluate current commercially marketed serology tests for specificity and sensitivity and to help determine how results from serology tests could support policymaking.
CDC will share information publicly on the recommended use of serology testing as soon as enough data becomes available.
We are currently recommending total Immunoglobin, which would include both IgG and IgM.
The International Reagent Resourceexternal icon (IRR) was established by CDC more than 10 years ago to provide registered users with reagents, tools, and information for studying and detecting Influenza and other pathogens, including the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
IRR has worked to acquire, authenticate, and produce reagents that scientists need to carry out CDC-directed research and develop improved diagnostic tests, vaccines, and detection methods.
By centralizing these functions within IRR, access to and use of these materials in the scientific and public health community is monitored and quality control of the reagents is assured.
To support health departments during the COVID-19 pandemic, IRR has expanded to provide many products needed for diagnostic testing, including swabs to collect specimens, numerous commercially produced EUA assays, and other materials.
The International Reagent Resourceexternal icon is managed under a CDC contract by American Type Culture Collection (ATCC).
The catalog of COVID-19 diagnostic supplies includes:
A comprehensive list of all diagnostic testing supplies available through IRR is provided on the IRR websiteexternal icon.
New reagents may be added to the IRR catalog as the emergency response progresses.
CDC limits IRR registration and SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic reagent distribution to U.S. state and local public health laboratories validated to perform SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic testing.
During the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, CDC will defer the decision to authorize new laboratories to the corresponding state public health laboratory.
Clinical laboratories can purchase reagents for the CDC EUA real-time RT-PCR primers and probes from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT) or Biosearch Technologies.
CDC has posted a list of approved reagents and acceptable lots on the CDC COVID-19 website.
Clinical laboratories also can purchase commercially developed diagnostic tests with an EUA from the manufacturer.
CDC has developed a new laboratory test kit for use in testing patient specimens for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus that causes COVID-19.
The test kit is called the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 2019-Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Real-Time Reverse Transcriptase (RT)-PCR Diagnostic Panel.
It is intended for use with the Applied Biosystems 7500 Fast DX Real-Time PCR Instrument with SDS 1.4 software.
This test is intended for use with upper and lower respiratory specimens.
CDCs test kit is intended for use by laboratories designated by CDC as qualified, and in the United States, certified under the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) to perform high complexity tests.
On Monday, February 3, 2020, CDC submitted an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) package to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to expedite FDA permitted use of the CDC diagnostic panel in the United States.
The EUA process enables FDA to consider and authorize the use of unapproved, but potentially life-saving medical or diagnostic products during a public health emergency.
The U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services declared the SARS-CoV-2 virus a U.S. public health emergency on Friday, January 31, 2020.
FDA issued the EUA on February 4, 2020. International Reagent Resource (IRR) began distribution of the test kits to states, but shortly thereafter performance issues were identified related to a problem in the manufacturing of one of the reagents which led to laboratories not being able to verify the test performance.
CDC remanufactured the reagents with more robust quality control measures.
New tests were distributed to states and are in use.
CDC continues to perform initial testing.
This is a picture of CDCs laboratory test kit for  SARS-CoV-2.
CDC tests are provided to U.S. state and local public health laboratories and Department of Defense laboratories that were either previously qualified for being able to perform a similar type of test used to detect influenza or have been recently approved by their state public health laboratory for SARS-CoV-2 testing.
This is a picture of CDCs laboratory test kit for  SARS-CoV-2.
CDC tests are provided to U.S. state and local public health laboratories and Department of Defense laboratories that were either previously qualified for being able to perform a similar type of test used to detect influenza or have been recently approved by their state public health laboratory for SARS-CoV-2 testing.
CDC has developed a new laboratory test to assist with efforts to determine how much of the U.S. population has been exposed to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
The serology test looks for the presence of antibodies, which are specific proteins made in response to infections.
Antibodies can be found in the blood and in other tissues of those who are tested after infection.
The antibodies detected by this test indicate that a person had an immune response to SARS-CoV-2, whether symptoms developed from infection or the infection was asymptomatic.
Antibody test results are important in detecting infections with few or no symptoms.
Currently, CDCs serologic test is designed and validated for broad-based surveillance and research that will give us information needed to guide the response to the pandemic and protect the publics health.
The test is not currently designed to test individuals who want to know if they have been previously infected with COVID-19.
The results of these studies will allow us to estimate how many people have been infected nationally.
The results will also provide information about the percentage of U.S. residents who have not had COVID-19 and are still at risk for infection.
This research is designed to help us understand who has been infected with SARS-CoV-2 and determine factors that confer protection against this virus.
During the week of March 30, CDC and public health partners began the first stage of what will grow to be wide studies of community transmission of SARS-CoV-2.
These initial studies use serum samples collected in the state of Washington and New York City.
The second stage will expand to include serologic testing in more areas with high numbers of people with diagnosed infections.
It will also include studies of households in some states.
CDC is evaluating commercially manufactured serologic tests in collaboration with the Biomedical Research and Development Authority, the Food and Drug Administration, the National Institutes of Health, the Department of Defense, and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy.
This evaluation is expected to be completed in late April.
Virus isolates will be used for research by the scientific and medical community
One important way that CDC is supporting global efforts to study and learn about the virus that causes COVID-19 in the laboratory is growing the virus in cell-culture so that researchers in the scientific and medical community can use the virus in their studies.
Once BEI Resourcesexternal icon expands the material that they received from CDC, CDCs SARS-CoV-2 isolate can be requested by public and academic institutions that maintain appropriate facilities and safety programs, as well as have the appropriate expertise, as required by BEI.
Some areas of COVID-19 research that public and academic institutions may study include:
Virus stability research: This is research that indicates how long the virus can survive under certain conditions, such as how long the virus can remain viable and infectious on surfaces, and the temperatures at which it can survive.
Revisions were made on April 14, 2020 to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on April 2, 2020 to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on March 24, 2020 to reflect the following:
Revisions were made on March 21, 2020 to reflect the following:
Clinicians considering testing people with possible COVID-19 should  work with their local and state health departments to coordinate testing through public health laboratories, or work with commercial or clinical laboratories using diagnostic tests granted an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
CDC has guidance for who should be tested, but decisions about testing are at the discretion of state and local health departments and/or individual clinicians.
Healthcare providers should report positive results to their local/state health department.
Clinical laboratories should NOT attempt viral isolation from specimens collected from people suspected to have COVID-19 unless this is performed in a BSL-3 laboratory.
Testing for other pathogens by the provider should be done as part of the initial evaluation but should not delay testing for SARS-CoV-2.
All testing for SARS-CoV-2 should be conducted in consultation with a healthcare provider.
Nasopharyngeal (NP) swabs can be used for testing asymptomatic persons in a healthcare setting, including long-term care facilities.
At this time anterior nares and mid-turbinate specimen collection are only appropriate for symptomatic patients and both nares should be swabbed.
The guidance below addresses options for collection of specimens once a clinical determination has been made to pursue SARS-CoV-2 testing.
For initial diagnostic testing for SARS-CoV-2, CDC recommends collecting and testing an upper respiratory specimen.
Nasopharyngeal specimen is the preferred choice for swab-based SARS-CoV-2 testing.
When collection of a nasopharyngeal swab is not possible, the following are acceptable alternatives:
For NS, a single polyester swab with a plastic shaft should be used to sample both nares.
NS or NMT swabs should be placed in a transport tube containing either viral transport medium, Amies transport medium, or sterile saline.
See the standard operating procedure for public health labs to create viral transport mediumpdf icon in accordance with CDCs protocol.
If both NP and OP swabs are collected, they should be combined in a single tube to maximize test sensitivity and limit use of testing resources.
CDC also recommends testing lower respiratory tract specimens, if available.
For patients who develop a productive cough, sputum should be collected and tested for SARS-CoV-2.
The induction of sputum is not recommended.
When it is clinically indicated (e.g those receiving invasive mechanical ventilation), a lower respiratory tract aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage sample should be collected and tested as a lower respiratory tract specimen.
Specimens should be collected as soon as possible once a decision has been made to pursue SARS-CoV-2 testing, regardless of the time of symptom onset.
Maintain proper infection control and use recommended personal protective equipment, which includes an N95 or higher-level respirator (or facemask if a respirator is not available), eye protection, gloves, and a gown, when collecting specimens.
See Biosafety FAQs for handling and processing specimens from suspected case patients.
Proper collection of specimens is the most important step in the laboratory diagnosis of infectious disease.
A specimen that is not collected correctly may lead to false negative test results.
The following specimen collection guidelines follow standard recommended procedures.
Use only synthetic fiber swabs with plastic shafts.
Do not use calcium alginate swabs or swabs with wooden shafts, as they may contain substances that inactivate some viruses and inhibit PCR testing.
Place swabs immediately into sterile tubes containing 2-3 mL of viral transport media.
In general CDC is now recommending collecting only the NP swab.
If both swabs are used, NP and OP specimens should be combined at collection into a single vial.
OP swabs remain an acceptable specimen type.
Nasopharyngeal swab: Insert flexible wire shaft minitip swab through the nares parallel to the palate (not upwards) until resistance is encountered or the distance is equivalent to that from the ear to the nostril of the patient, indicating contact with the nasopharynx.
Swab should reach depth equal to distance from nostrils to outer opening of the ear.
Gently rub and roll the swab.
Leave swab in place for several seconds to absorb secretions.
Slowly remove swab while rotating it.
Oropharyngeal swab (e.g throat swab): Insert swab into the posterior pharynx and tonsillar areas.
Rub swab over both tonsillar pillars and posterior oropharynx and avoid touching the tongue, teeth, and gums.
Nasopharyngeal wash/aspirate or nasal aspirate (NA)
Attach catheter to suction apparatus.
Have the patient sit with head tilted slightly backward.
Instill 1 mL-1.5 mL of non-bacteriostatic saline (pH 7.0) into one nostril.
Insert the tubing into the nostril parallel to the palate (not upwards).
Catheter should reach depth equal to distance from nostrils to outer opening of ear.
Begin gentle suction/aspiration and remove catheter while rotating it gently.
Place specimen in a sterile viral transport media tube.
Nasal mid-turbinate (NMT) swab, also called Deep Nasal Swab
Use a flocked tapered swab.
Tilt patients head back 70 degrees.
While gently rotating the swab, insert swab less than one inch (about 2 cm) into nostril (until resistance is met at turbinates).
Rotate the swab several times against nasal wall and repeat in other nostril using the same swab.
For more information, see the CDC Influenza Specimen Collectionpdf icon instructions.
Note that these instructions are applicable for respiratory viruses in general, and not specific for influenza virus.
Using a flocked or spun polyester swab, insert the swab at least 1 cm (0.5 inch) inside the nares and firmly sample the nasal membrane by rotating the swab and leaving in place for 10 to 15 seconds.
Sample both nares with same swab.
Bronchoalveolar lavage, tracheal aspirate, pleural fluid, lung biopsy
Collect 2-3 mL into a sterile, leak-proof, screw-cap sputum collection cup or sterile dry container.
Due to the increased technical skill and equipment needs, collection of specimens other than sputum from the lower respiratory tract may be limited to patients presenting with more severe disease, including people admitted to the hospital and/or fatal cases.
Educate the patient about the difference between sputum and oral secretions (saliva).
Have the patient rinse the mouth with water and then expectorate deep cough sputum directly into a sterile, leak-proof, screw-cap collection cup or sterile dry container.
Store specimens at 2-8°C for up to 72 hours after collection.
If a delay in testing or shipping is expected, store specimens at -70°C or below.
Specimens must be packaged, shipped, and transported according to the current edition of the International Air Transport Association (IATA) Dangerous Goods Regulations external icon.
If shipping samples to CDC:  If specimens will ship without delay, store specimens at 2-8°C, and ship overnight to CDC on ice pack.
If a delay in shipping will result in receipt at CDC more than 72 hours after collection, store specimens at -70°C or below and ship overnight to CDC on dry ice.
Additional useful and detailed information on packing, shipping, and transporting specimens can be found at Interim Laboratory Biosafety Guidelines for Handling and Processing Specimens Associated with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Samples may be shipped to CDC if repeated testing results remain inconclusive or if other unusual results are obtained.
Please contact CDC at respvirus@cdc.gov prior to submitting samples.
Label each specimen container with the patients ID number (e.g medical record number), unique CDC or state-generated nCov specimen ID (e.g laboratory requisition number), specimen type (e.g serum) and the date the sample was collected.
Complete a CDC Form 50.34 for each specimen submitted.
In the upper left box of the form, 1) for test requested select Respiratory virus molecular detection (non-influenza) CDC-10401 and 2) for At CDC, bring to the attention of enter Stephen Lindstrom: 2019-nCoV PUI.
Please refer to our instruction guidance for submitting CDC Form 50.34 found here: Guidelines For Submitting Specimens to CDCpdf icon
For additional information, consultation, or the CDC shipping address, contact the CDC Emergency Operations Center (EOC) at 770-488-7100.
Revisions made on March 31, 2020 include recommendations for:
Until more information becomes available, precautions should be taken in handling specimens that are suspected or confirmed for SARS-CoV-2.
Timely communication between clinical and laboratory staff is essential to minimize the risk incurred in handling specimens from patients with possible SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Such specimens should be labeled accordingly, and the laboratory should be alerted to ensure proper specimen handling.
General and specific biosafety guidelines for handling SARS-CoV-2 specimens are provided below.
For additional information on handling SARS-CoV-2 specimens, refer to the Laboratory Biosafety Frequently Asked Questions.
All laboratories should perform a site-specific and activity-specific risk assessment to identify and mitigate risks.
Risk assessments and mitigation measures are dependent on:
Follow Standard Precautions when handling clinical specimens, all of which may contain potentially infectious materials.
Standard Precautions include hand hygiene and the use of personal protective equipment (PPE), such as laboratory coats or gowns, gloves, and eye protection.
Follow routine laboratory practices and procedures for decontamination of work surfaces and management of laboratory waste.
Routine diagnostic testing of specimens, such as the following activities, can be handled in a BSL-2 laboratory using Standard Precautions:
For diagnostic testing of specimens conducted outside of a BSL-2 laboratory, such as rapid respiratory testing performed at the point of care, use Standard Precautions to provide a barrier between the specimen and personnel during specimen manipulation.
For additional information on specimen collection, handling, and testing refer to Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) or Collecting, Handling, and Testing Clinical Specimens from Persons Under Investigation (PUIs).
For procedures with a high likelihood to generate aerosols or droplets, use either a certified Class II Biological Safety Cabinet (BSC) or additional precautions to provide a barrier between the specimen and personnel.
Examples of these additional precautions include personal protective equipment (PPE), such as a surgical mask or face shield, or other physical barriers, like a splash shield; centrifuge safety cups; and sealed centrifuge rotors to reduce the risk of exposure to laboratory personnel.
Site- and activity-specific biosafety risk assessments should be performed to determine if additional biosafety precautions are warranted based on situational needs, such as high testing volumes, and the likelihood to generate infectious droplets and aerosols.
Procedures that concentrate viruses, such as precipitation or membrane filtration, can be performed in a BSL-2 laboratory with unidirectional airflow and BSL-3 precautions, including respiratory protection and a designated area for donning and doffing PPE.
The donning and doffing space should not be in the workspace.
Work should be performed in a certified Class II BSC.
This guidance is intended for only those laboratories that perform virus concentration procedures, such as wastewater/sewage surveillance testing, not public health or clinical diagnostic laboratories that handle COVID-19 clinical specimens or laboratories that perform culture and isolation of SARS-CoV-2.
Site- and activity-specific biosafety risk assessments should be performed to determine if additional biosafety precautions are warranted based on situational needs, such as high testing volumes or large volumes, and the likelihood to generate infectious droplets and aerosols.
Virus isolation in cell culture and initial characterization of viral agents recovered in cultures of SARS-CoV-2 specimens should only be conducted in a Biosafety Level 3 (BSL-3) laboratory using BSL-3 practices.
Site- and activity-specific biosafety risk assessments should be performed to determine if additional biosafety precautions are warranted based on situational needs.
Decontaminate work surfaces and equipment with appropriate disinfectants.
Use EPA-registered hospital disinfectants with label claims to be effective against SARS-CoV-2external icon.
Follow manufacturers recommendations for use, such as dilution, contact time, and safe handling.
Handle laboratory waste from testing suspected or confirmed COVID-19 patient specimens as all other biohazardous waste in the laboratory.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest that this laboratory waste needs any additional packaging or disinfection procedures
Pack and ship suspected and confirmed SARS-CoV-2 patient specimens, cultures, or isolates as UN 3373 Biological Substance, Category B, in accordance with the current edition of the International Air Transport Association (IATA) Dangerous Goods Regulationsexternal icon.
Personnel must be trained to pack and ship according to the regulations and in a manner that corresponds to their function-specific responsibilities.
All laboratories should perform a site-specific and activity-specific risk assessment to identify and mitigate risks and determine if enhanced biosafety precautions are warranted based on situational needs, such as high testing volumes, and the likelihood to generate infectious droplets and aerosols.
Risk assessments and mitigation measures are dependent on the procedures performed, identification of the hazards involved in the process and/or procedures, the competency level of the personnel who perform the procedures, the laboratory equipment and facility, and the resources available.
The risk assessment should identify all potential scenarios of a particular activity that could produce a negative outcome.
The risk assessment should prioritize those potential negative outcomes, or risks, based on an evaluation of the likelihood and consequences of each of those identified risks.
The risk assessment should determine the most appropriate control measures, and how the system will measure the effectiveness of those control measures.
For additional information, refer to the following:
For procedures with a high likelihood to generate aerosols or droplets, use either a certified Class II Type A1 or A2 BSC or additional precautions to provide a barrier between the specimen and personnel.
Examples of these additional precautions include personal protective equipment (PPE), such as a surgical mask or face shield, or other physical barriers, like a splash shield; centrifuge safety cups; and sealed centrifuge rotors to reduce the risk of exposure to laboratory personnel.
For additional information, refer to the following:
For diagnostic testing of specimens conducted outside of a traditional clinical laboratory, such as rapid respiratory testing, use Standard Precautions to provide a barrier between the specimen and personnel during specimen manipulation.
If laboratory personnel have direct contact with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 patients, they should follow recommended PPE for health care providers while in the presence of these patients.
Routine diagnostic testing of patient specimens, such as the following activities, can be handled in a BSL-2 laboratory using Standard Precautions:
• Using automated instruments and analyzers
• Staining and microscopic analysis of fixed smears
• Examination of bacterial cultures
• Pathologic examination and processing of formalin-fixed or otherwise inactivated tissues
• Molecular analysis of extracted nucleic acid preparations
• Final packaging of specimens for transport to diagnostic laboratories for additional testing.
Specimens should already be in a sealed, decontaminated primary container
• Using inactivated specimens, such as specimens in nucleic acid extraction buffer
• Electron microscopic studies with glutaraldehyde-fixed grids
For additional information, refer to the following:
Decontaminate work surfaces and equipment with appropriate disinfectants.
Use EPA-registered hospital disinfectants with label claims to be effective against SARS-CoV-2external icon.
Follow manufacturers recommendations for use, such as dilution, contact time, and safe handling.
Store specimens at 2-8oC for up to 72 hours after collection.
If a delay occurs in extraction, store specimens at -70oC or lower.
Store extracted nucleic acid samples at -70oC or lower.
For additional information, refer to the following:
Handle laboratory waste from testing suspected or confirmed COVID-19 patient specimens as all other biohazardous waste in the laboratory.
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest that this laboratory waste needs additional packaging or disinfection procedures.
For additional information, refer to the following:
Personnel should adhere to standard procedures associated with other respiratory pathogens, such as seasonal influenza and other human coronaviruses, when they transport specimens within a facility.
Personnel should perform site- and activity-specific risk assessments to determine if enhanced biosafety precautions are warranted based on situational needs.
For additional information, refer to the following:
Standard Precautions are based on the principle that all blood, body fluids, secretions, nonintact skin, mucous membranes, and excretions (except sweat) may contain transmissible infectious agents.
Standard Precautions include hand hygiene and the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) such as laboratory coats or gowns, gloves, and eye protection.
For additional information, refer to the following:
Aerosols and droplets containing particles that are &lt;100 μm in diameter are not visible to the naked eye.
Laboratory workers may not be aware that such particles can be generated during many laboratory procedures and that these particles could be inhaled or could cross-contaminate work surfaces, materials, and equipment.
Infectious aerosols are small liquid or solid particles suspended in the air that contain infectious agents.
They can disperse throughout the laboratory and remain infective over time and distance.
These particles are of a size that may be inhaled into the lower respiratory tract (&lt;5 μm in diameter).
Examples of organisms transmitted by aerosols include spores of Aspergillus spp Mycobacterium tuberculosis, rubeola virus (measles), and varicella-zoster virus (chickenpox).
Droplets traditionally are defined as larger infectious particles (&gt;5 μm in diameter) that rapidly fall out of the air, contaminating gloves, the immediate work area, and the mucous membranes of the persons performing the procedure.
Examples of infectious agents that are transmitted via the droplet route include Bordetella pertussis, influenza viruses, adenovirus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, SARS-associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV), group A streptococcus, and Neisseria meningitidis.
For additional information, refer to the following:
Many routine laboratory procedures can potentially generate aerosols and droplets that are often undetectable.
The following laboratory procedures have been associated with the generation of infectious aerosols and droplets: centrifugation, pipetting, vortexing, mixing, shaking, sonicating, removing caps, decanting liquids, preparing smears, flaming slides, aliquoting and loading specimens, loading syringes, manipulating needles, syringes or sharps, aspirating and transferring blood and body fluids, subculturing blood culture bottles, spilling specimens, and cleaning up spills.
For additional information, refer to the following:
For transporting patient specimens, cultures or isolates, personnel must be trained in the proper safety, packing, and shipping regulations for Division 6.2, UN 3373 Biological Substance, Category B in accordance with the current edition of the International Air Transport Association (IATA) Dangerous Goods Regulations (DGR)external icon.
Personnel should be trained in a manner that corresponds to their function-specific responsibilities.
For additional information, refer to the following:
Pack and ship suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 patient specimens, cultures or isolates as UN 3373 Biological Substance, Category B, in accordance with the current edition of the International Air Transport Association (IATA) Dangerous Goods Regulations (DGR)external icon:
For additional information, refer to the following:
Specimens should be shipped at 2-8oC with ice packs.
If the specimen is frozen, ship overnight on dry ice.
The primary receptacle and the secondary packaging should maintain their integrity at the temperature of the refrigerant used as well as the temperatures and the pressures which could result if refrigeration were lost.
Packages containing dry ice should be designed and constructed so as to prevent the buildup of pressure and to allow the release of gas that could rupture the packaging.
For additional information, refer to the following:
A: Ensure the outer package has been properly marked and labeled with the following:
For additional information, refer to the following:
Ensure the outer package has been properly marked and labeled with the following:
For additional information, refer to the following:
The overpack should be marked in accordance with the packing instructions required for the outer package:
For additional information, refer to the following:
• IATA Dangerous Goods Regulations Packaging Instruction 650pdf iconexternal iconpdf iconexternal icon
• Interim Laboratory Biosafety Guidelines for Handling and Processing Specimens Associated with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
A shippers declaration is not required for UN 3373 Biological Substances, Category B shipped samples.
If an Air Waybill is used, the Nature and Quantity of Goods box should show UN 3373 Biological Substance, Category B along with the number of packages.
If specimens are shipped on dry ice, include UN 1845, Dry Ice, 9, along with the net weight of the dry ice.
See IATA PI 650 for additional information.
For additional information, refer to the following:
Yes, a Responsible Person should be listed on the air waybill or Shippers Declaration (if applicable).
For additional information, refer to the following:
Decontaminate work surfaces and equipment with appropriate disinfectants.
Use EPA-registered hospital disinfectants with label claims to be effective against SARS-CoV-2external icon.
Follow manufacturers recommendations for use, such as dilution, contact time, and safe handling.
For additional information, refer to the following:
Visit the FDA website for information about the development and performance of diagnostic tests for SARS-CoV-2.
The diagnostic panels Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-authorized instructions for useexternal iconexternal icon contain information about the test, its intended use, test procedure and performance characteristics.
FDAs EUA websiteexternal iconexternal icon has published the FDA Letter of Authorizationexternal iconexternal icon for the diagnostic panel.
the authorization letter defines the authorized use and the conditions of authorization that apply to CDC and to testing laboratories.
The International Reagent Resource (IRR)external iconexternal icon will distribute the diagnostic panel and most of the associated reagents to registered state and local public health labs.
During this emergency response to COVID-19, CDC is deferring the decision to authorize new county or city laboratories to their state public health laboratory.
Laboratories that meet these criteria may request registration at CDCs IRR.
CDC has also posted a list of commercially available lots of primer and probe setspdf iconpdf icon that have passed CDC functional quality control and may be used with the CDC 2019-nCoV Real-Time RT-PCR Diagnostic Panel.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) authorized the Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) on February 4, 2020.
This is a picture of CDCs laboratory test kit for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
CDC tests are provided to U.S. state and local public health laboratories, Department of Defense (DoD) laboratories.
This is a picture of CDCs laboratory test kit for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
CDC tests are provided to U.S. state and local public health laboratories, Department of Defense (DoD) laboratories.
The CDC 2019-nCoV Real-Time RT-PCR Diagnostic Panel contains the following:
The CDC 2019-nCoV Real-Time RT-PCR Diagnostic Panel also requires the use of additional authorized materials and authorized ancillary reagents that are not included with the test but are commonly used in clinical laboratories.
They are described in the authorized CDC 2019-nCoV Real-Time RT-PCR Diagnostic Panel Instructions for Use Package Insert.
The CDC 2019-nCoV Real-Time RT-PCR Diagnostic Panel requires the control materials, or other authorized control materials listed below.
All of these controls must generate expected results for a test to be considered valid, as outlined in the CDC 2019-nCoV Real-Time RT-PCR Diagnostic Panel Instructions for Use.
Clinicians should base their decisions on whether a patient should be tested for COVID-19 on:
Clinicians are encouraged to test for other causes of respiratory illness in addition to COVID-19.
Use appropriate personal protective equipment when collecting and handling specimens from individuals suspected of being infected with COVID-19, as outlined in the CDC Interim Guidelines for Collecting, Handling, and Testing Clinical Specimens From Persons for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The National Institute of Health (NIH)s Biodefense and Emerging Infections Research Resources Repositoryexternal iconexternal icon (BEI Resources) will provide laboratories with SARS CoV-2 samples.
The Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is providing a web portal to support U.S. government medical countermeasure research and development.
Interested stakeholders can learn more here.external iconexternal icon
